The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Slang Dictionary, by John Camden Hotten

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Slang Dictionary
       Etymological, Historical and Andecdotal

Author: John Camden Hotten

Release Date: February 16, 2013 [EBook #42108]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SLANG DICTIONARY ***




Produced by Henry Flower, Delphine Lettau and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)









Transcriber’s Note:

Superscript text is preceded by a caret symbol, e.g. ^4.

Symbols in the printed text have been represented by characters which
may not display correctly in all fonts.

Italics are indicated by _underscores_, and bold text by ~tildes~. Small
capitals have been converted to upper case.




[Illustration: A CADGER’S MAP OF A BEGGING DISTRICT.

EXPLANATION OF THE HIEROGLYPHICS.

☓ ~No good~; too poor, and know too much.

◠+ ~Stop~,—if you have what they want, they will buy. They are pretty
“_fly_” (knowing).

⊃— ~Go in this direction~, it is better than the other road. Nothing
that way.

◇ ~Bone~ (good). Safe for a “cold tatur,” if for nothing else. “_Cheese
your patter_” (don’t talk much) here.

▽ ~Cooper’d~ (spoilt) by too many tramps calling there.

□ ~Gammy~ (unfavourable), likely to have you taken up. Mind the dog.

⦿ ~Flummuxed~ (dangerous), sure of a month in “_quod_,” prison.

⊕ ~Religious~, but tidy on the whole. ]




  THE
  SLANG DICTIONARY

  ETYMOLOGICAL
  HISTORICAL AND ANECDOTAL

  [Illustration: “THE WEDGE” AND THE “WOODEN SPOON.”]

  A NEW IMPRESSION

  LONDON
  CHATTO & WINDUS
  1913




PREFACE.


Slang, like everything else, changes much in the course of time; and
though but fifteen years have elapsed since this Dictionary was first
introduced to the public, alterations have since then been many and
frequent in the subject of which it treats. The first issue of a work of
this kind is, too, ever beset with difficulties, and the compiler was
always aware that, though under the circumstances of its production the
book was an undoubted success, it necessarily lacked many of the
elements which would make that success lasting, and cause the “Slang
Dictionary” to be regarded as an authority and a work of reference not
merely among the uneducated, but among people of cultivated tastes and
inquiring minds. For though the vulgar use of the word Slang applies to
those words only which are used by the dangerous classes and the lowest
grades of society, the term has in reality, and should have—as every
one who has ever studied the subject knows—a much wider significance.
Bearing this in mind, the original publisher of this Dictionary lost no
opportunity of obtaining information of a useful kind, which could
hardly find place in any other book of reference, with the intention of
eventually bringing out an entirely new edition, in which all former
errors should be corrected and all fresh meanings and new words find a
place. His intention always was to give those words which are familiar
to all conversant with our colloquialisms and locutions, but which have
hitherto been connected with an unwritten tongue, a local habitation,
and to produce a book which, in its way, would be as useful to students
of philology, as well as to lovers of human nature in all its phases,
as any standard work in the English language. The squeamishness which
tries to ignore the existence of slang fails signally, for not only in
the streets and the prisons, but at the bar, on the bench, in the
pulpit, and in the Houses of Parliament, does slang make itself heard,
and, as the shortest and safest means to an end, understood too.

My predecessor, the original compiler, did not live to see his wish
become an actual fact; and, failing him, it devolved upon me to
undertake the task of revision and addition. How far this has been
accomplished, the curious reader who is possessed of a copy of each
edition can best judge for himself by comparing any couple of pages he
may select. Of my own share in the work I wish to say nothing, as I have
mainly benefited by the labours of others; but I may say that, when I
undertook the position of editor of what, with the smallest possible
stretch of fancy, may now be called a new book, I had no idea that the
alteration would be nearly so large or so manifest. However, as the work
is now done, it will best speak for itself, and, as good wine needs no
bush, I will leave it, in all hope of their tenderness, to those readers
who are best qualified to say how the task has been consummated.

In conclusion, it is but fair for me to thank, as strongly as weak words
will permit, those gentlemen who have in various ways assisted me. To
two of them, who are well known in the world of literature, and who have
not only aided me with advice, but have placed many new words and
etymologies at my service, I am under particular obligation. With this I
beg to subscribe myself, the reader’s most obedient servant,

        The Editor.

    _December 20, 1873._

    NOTE.—The reader will bear in mind that this is a Dictionary of
    _modern_ Slang,—a list of colloquial words and phrases in _present_
    use,—whether of ancient or modern formation. Whenever _Ancient_ is
    appended to a word, it means that the expression was in respectable
    use in or previous to the reign of Queen Elizabeth. _Old_ or _Old
    English_, affixed to a word, signifies that it was in general use as
    a proper expression in or previous to the reign of Charles II. _Old
    Cant_ indicates that the term was in use as a Cant word during or
    before the same reign.

_The Publishers will be much obliged by the receipt of any cant, slang,
or vulgar words not mentioned in the Dictionary. The probable origin, or
etymology, of any fashionable or unfashionable vulgarism, will also be
received with thanks._




CONTENTS.


                                                                    PAGE

  THE HISTORY OF CANT, OR THE SECRET LANGUAGE OF VAGABONDS             1

  ACCOUNT OF THE HIEROGLYPHICS USED BY VAGABONDS                      27

  A SHORT HISTORY OF SLANG, OR THE VULGAR LANGUAGE OF FAST LIFE       34

  DICTIONARY OF MODERN SLANG, CANT, AND VULGAR WORDS                  71

  SOME ACCOUNT OF THE BACK SLANG                                     347

  GLOSSARY OF THE BACK SLANG                                         353

  SOME ACCOUNT OF THE RHYMING SLANG                                  358

  GLOSSARY OF THE RHYMING SLANG                                      365

  CENTRE SLANG                                                       369

  THE BIBLIOGRAPHY OF SLANG                                          371




“_All ridiculous words make their first entry into a language by
familiar phrases; I dare not answer for these that they will not in time
be looked upon as a part of our tongue._”—SPECTATOR.

“_Rabble-charming words, which carry so much wild fire wrapt up in
them._”—SOUTH.

“_Slang derivations are generally indirect, turning upon metaphor and
fanciful allusions, and other than direct etymological connexion. Such
allusions and fancies are essentially temporary or local; they rapidly
pass out of the public mind: the word remains, while the key to its
origin is lost._”

“_Many of these [slang] words and phrases are but serving their
apprenticeship, and will eventually become the active strength of our
language._”—H. T. BUCKLE.




THE HISTORY OF CANT,

OR THE

SECRET LANGUAGE OF VAGABONDS.


Cant and Slang are universal and world-wide. By their means is often
said in a sentence what would otherwise take an hour to express. Nearly
every nation on the face of the globe, polite and barbarous, has its
divisions and subdivisions of various ranks of society. These are
necessarily of many kinds, stationary and wandering, civilized and
uncivilized, respectable and disreputable,—those who have fixed abodes
and avail themselves of the refinements of civilization, and those who
go from place to place picking up a precarious livelihood by petty
sales, begging, or theft. This peculiarity is to be observed amongst the
heathen tribes of the southern hemisphere, as well as in the oldest and
most refined countries of Europe. In South Africa, the naked and
miserable Hottentots are pestered by the still more abject _Sonquas_;
and it may be some satisfaction for us to know that our old enemies at
the Cape, the Kaffirs, are troubled with a tribe of rascals called
_Fingoes_,—the former term, we are informed by travellers, signifying
beggars, and the latter wanderers and outcasts. In South America, and
among the islands of the Pacific, matters are pretty much the same.
Sleek rascals, without much inclination towards honesty, fatten, or
rather fasten, like the insects in the famous epigram, upon other
rascals, who would be equally sleek and fat but for their vagabond
dependents. Luckily for respectable persons, however, vagabonds, both at
home and abroad, generally show certain outward peculiarities which
distinguish them from the great mass of law-abiding people on whom they
subsist. Observation shows that the wandering races are remarkable for
an abnormal development of the bones of the face, as the jaws,
cheek-bones, &c., for high-crowned, stubborn-shaped heads, quick,
restless eyes,[1] and hands nervously itching to be doing; for their
love of gambling; for sensuality of all kinds; and for their use of a
CANT language with which to conceal their designs and plunderings.

The secret jargon, or rude speech, of the vagabonds who hang upon the
Hottentots is termed Cuze-cat. In Finland, the fellows who steal
seal-skins, pick the pockets of bear-skin overcoats, and talk cant, are
termed Lappes. In France, the secret language of highwaymen,
housebreakers, and pickpockets, is named Argot. The brigands and more
romantic rascals of Spain term their private tongue Germania,[2] or
Robbers’ Language. Rothwälsch,[3] or foreign-beggar-talk, is synonymous
with cant and thieves’ talk in Germany. The vulgar dialect of Malta, and
the Scala towns of the Levant—imported into this country and
incorporated with English cant—is known as the Lingua Franca, or
bastard Italian. And the crowds of lazy beggars that infest the streets
of Naples and Rome, as well as the brigands of Pompeii, use a secret
language termed Gergo. In England, as we all know, it is called
Cant—often improperly Slang.

Most nations, then, possess each a tongue, or series of tongues maybe,
each based on the national language, by which not only thieves, beggars,
and other outcasts communicate, but which is used more or less by all
classes. There is hardly any community in this country, hardly any
profession, but has its slang, and proficiency in this is the greatest
desideratum of an aspirant to the pleasures of Society, or the honours
of literature and art. The formation of these secret tongues varies, of
course, with the circumstances surrounding the speakers. A writer in
_Notes and Queries_ has well remarked that “the investigation of the
origin and principles of cant and slang language opens a curious field
of inquiry, replete with considerable interest to the philologist and
the philosopher. It affords a remarkable instance of lingual
contrivance, which, without the introduction of much arbitrary matter,
has developed a system of communicating ideas, having all the advantages
of a foreign language.”

“The terms Cant and Canting were probably derived from chaunt and
chaunting,—the whining tone, or modulation of voice adopted by
beggars, with intent to coax, wheedle, or cajole by pretensions of
wretchedness.”[4] For the origin of the other application of the word
Cant, pulpit hypocrisy, we are indebted to the _Spectator_—“Cant is by
some people derived from one Andrew Cant, who, they say, was a
Presbyterian minister in some illiterate part of Scotland, who, by
exercise and use, had obtained the faculty, alias gift, of talking in
the pulpit in such a dialect that ’tis said he was understood by none
but his own congregation,—and not by all of them. Since Master Cant’s
time it has been understood in a larger sense, and signifies all
exclamations, whinings, unusual tones, and, in fine, all praying and
preaching like the unlearned of the Presbyterians.” This anecdote is
curious, though it is but fair to assume that the preacher’s name was
taken from his practice, rather than that the practice was called after
the preacher. As far as we are concerned, however, in the present
inquiry, Cant was derived from chaunt, a beggar’s whine; “chaunting”
being the recognised term amongst beggars to this day for begging
orations and street whinings; and “chaunter,” a street talker and tramp,
is still the term used by strollers and patterers. This race is,
however, nearly obsolete. The use of the word Cant, amongst beggars,
must certainly have commenced at a very early date, for we find “To
cante, to speake,” in Harman’s list of Rogues’ Words in the year 1566;
and Harrison about the same time,[5] in speaking of beggars and
Gipsies, says, “they have devised a language among themselves which they
name Canting, but others Pedlars’ Frenche.”

Now, the word Cant in its old sense, and Slang[6] in its modern
application, although used by good writers and persons of education as
synonyms, are in reality quite distinct and separate terms. Cant, apart
from religious hypocrisy, refers to the old secret language of Gipsies,
thieves, tramps, and beggars. Slang represents that evanescent language,
ever changing with fashion and taste, which has principally come into
vogue during the last seventy or eighty years, spoken by persons in
every grade of life, rich and poor, honest and dishonest.[7] Cant is
old; Slang is always modern and ever changing. To illustrate the
difference: a thief in Cant language would term a horse a “prancer” or a
“prad;” while in Slang, a man of fashion would speak of it as a “bit of
blood,” a “spanker,” or a “neat tit.” A handkerchief, too, would be a
“billy,” a “fogle,” or a “Kent rag,” in the secret language of low
characters; whilst amongst the modern folk who affect Slang, it would be
called a “stook,” a “wipe,” a “fogle,” or a “clout.” Cant was formed for
purposes of secrecy. Slang, though it has a tendency the same way, is
still often indulged in from a mild desire to appear familiar with life,
gaiety, town-humour, and the transient nicknames and street jokes of the
day. Both Cant and Slang, we have before said, are often huddled
together as synonyms; but they are most certainly distinct, and as such
should be used.

To the Gipsies, beggars and thieves are in great measure indebted for
their Cant language. It is supposed that the Gipsies originally landed
in this country early in the reign of Henry VIII. They were at first
treated as conjurors and magicians,—indeed, they were hailed by the
populace with as much applause as a company of English performers
usually receives on arriving in a distant colony. They came here with
all their old Eastern arts of palmistry and second-sight, with their
factitious power of doubling money by incantation and burial,—shreds of
pagan idolatry; and they brought with them, also, the dishonesty of the
lower-caste Orientals, and the nomadic tastes they had acquired through
centuries of wandering over nearly the whole of the then known globe.
They possessed also a language quite distinct from anything that had
been heard in England up till their advent; they claimed the title of
Egyptians, and as such, when their thievish propensities became a public
nuisance, were cautioned and proscribed in a royal proclamation by Henry
VIII.[8] The Gipsies were not long in the country before they found
native imitators; and indeed the imitation is much more frequently found
nowadays, in the ranks of the so-called Gipsies, than is the genuine
article. Vagabondism is peculiarly catching, and the idle, the vagrant,
and the criminal soon caught the idea from the Gipsies, and learned from
them to tramp, sleep under hedges and trees, tell fortunes, and find
lost property for a consideration—frequently, as the saying runs,
having found it themselves before it was lost. They also learned the
value and application of a secret tongue; indeed, with the Gipsies came
in all the accompaniments of maunding and imposture, except thieving and
begging, which were well known in this country, and perhaps in every
other, long before visitors had an opportunity of teaching them.

Harman, in 1566, wrote a singular, not to say droll, book, entitled, _A
Caveat for commen Cvrsetors, vulgarly called Vagabones, newly augmented
and inlarged_, wherein the history and various descriptions of rogues
and vagabonds are given, together with their canting tongue. This book,
the earliest of the kind, gives the singular fact that within a dozen
years after the landing of the Gipsies, companies of English vagrants
were formed, places of meeting appointed, districts for plunder and
begging operations marked out, and rules agreed to for their common
management. In some cases Gipsies joined the English gangs; in others,
English vagrants joined the Gipsies. The fellowship was found convenient
and profitable, as both parties were aliens to the laws and customs of
the country, living in a great measure in the open air, apart from the
lawful public, and often meeting each other on the same by-path, or in
the same retired valley; but seldom intermarrying or entirely adopting
each other’s habits. The common people, too, soon began to consider them
as of one family,—all rogues, and from Egypt. This superstition must
have been very firmly imbedded, for it is still current. The secret
language spoken by the Gipsies, principally Hindoo, and extremely
barbarous to English ears, was found incomprehensible and very difficult
to learn. The Gipsies naturally found a similar difficulty with the
English language. A rude, rough, and singular, but under the
circumstances not unnatural, compromise was made, and a mixture of
Gipsy, old English, newly-coined words, and cribbings from any foreign,
and therefore secret, language, mixed and jumbled together, formed what
has ever since been known as the Canting Language, or Pedlar’s French;
or, during the past century, St. Giles’s Greek.

Such was the origin of Cant; and in illustration of its blending with
the Gipsy or Cingari tongue, we are enabled to give the accompanying
list of Gipsy, and often Hindoo, words, with, in many instances, their
English representatives:—

             _Gipsy._                            _English._

  ~Bamboozle~, to perplex or mislead    ~Bamboozle~, to delude, cheat,
    by hiding. _Modern Gipsy._            or make a fool of any one.

  ~Bosh~, rubbish, nonsense, offal.     ~Bosh~, stupidity, foolishness.
    _Gipsy and Persian._

  ~Cheese~, thing or article, “That’s   ~Cheese~, or CHEESY, a
    the CHEESE,” or thing. _Gipsy and     first-rate or very good
    Hindoo._                              article.

  ~Chive~, the tongue. _Gipsy._         ~Chive~, or CHIVEY, a shout. To
                                          CHIVEY, to hunt down with
                                          shouts.

  ~Cuta~, a gold coin. _Danubian_       ~Couter~, a sovereign, twenty
    _Gipsy._                              shillings.

  ~Dade~, or DADI, a father. _Gipsy._   ~Daddy~, nursery term for
                                          father.(*)

  ~Distarabin~, a prison. _Gipsy._      ~Sturabin~, a prison.

  ~Gad~, or GADSI, a wife. _Gipsy._     ~Gad~, a female scold; a woman
                                          who tramps over the country
                                          with a beggar or hawker.

  ~Gibberish~, the language of          ~Gibberish~, rapid and unmeaning
    Gipsies, synonymous with SLANG.       speech.
    _Gipsy._

  ~Ischur~, SCHUR, or CHUR, a thief.    ~Cur~, a mean or dishonest
    _Gipsy and Hindoo._                   man.(*)

  ~Lab~, a word. _Gipsy._               ~Lobs~, words.

  ~Lowe~, or LOWR, money. _Gipsy        ~Lowre~, money. _Ancient Cant._
    and Wallachian._

  ~Mami~, a grandmother. _Gipsy._       ~Mammy~, or MAMMA, a mother,
                                          formerly sometimes used for
                                          grandmother.(*)

  ~Mang~, or MAUNG, to beg. _Gipsy      ~Maund~, to beg.
    and Hindoo._

  ~Mort~, a free woman,—one for         ~Mot~, a prostitute.
    common use amongst the male
    Gipsies, so appointed by Gipsy
    custom. _Gipsy._

  ~Mu~, the mouth. _Gipsy and Hindoo._  ~Moo~, or MUN, the mouth.

  ~Mull~, to spoil or destroy. _Gipsy._ ~Mull~, to spoil, or bungle.(*)

  ~Pal~, a brother. _Gipsy._            ~Pal~, a partner, or relation.

  ~Pané~, water. _Gipsy._ _Hindoo_,     ~Parney~, rain.
    PAWNEE.

  ~Rig~, a performance. _Gipsy._        ~Rig~, a frolic, or “spree.”

  ~Romany~, speech or language.         ~Romany~, the Gipsy language.
    _Spanish Gipsy._

  ~Rome~, or ROMM, a man. _Gipsy        ~Rum~, a good man, or thing. In
    and Coptic._                          the Robbers’ language of Spain
                                          (partly Gipsy), RUM signifies
                                          a harlot.

  ~Romee~, a woman. _Gipsy._            ~Rumy~, a good woman or girl.

  ~Slang~, the language spoken by       ~Slang~, low, vulgar,
    Gipsies. _Gipsy._                     unauthorized language.

  ~Tawno~, little. _Gipsy._             ~Tanny~, TEENY, little.

  ~Tschib~, or JIBB, the tongue.        ~Jibb~, the tongue; JABBER,[9]
    _Gipsy and Hindoo._                   quick-tongued, or fast talk.

[In those instances indicated by a (*), it is doubtful whether we are
indebted to the Gipsies for the terms. Dad, in Welsh, also signifies a
father. Cur is stated to be a mere term of reproach, like Dog, which in
all European languages has been applied in an abusive sense. Objections
may also be raised against Gad, Maund, and many other of these
parallels. We have, however, no wish to present them as infallible; our
idea is merely to call the reader’s attention to the undoubted
similarity between both the sound and the sense in most examples.]

Here, then, we have the remarkable fact of at least a few words of pure
Gipsy origin going the round of Europe, passing into this country before
the Reformation, and coming down to us through numerous generations
purely by the mouths of the people. They have seldom been written or
used in books, and it is simply as vulgarisms that they have reached us.
Only a few are now Cant, and some are household words. The word jockey,
as applied to a dealer or rider of horses, came from the Gipsy, and
means in that language a whip. The word, used as a verb, is an instance
of modern slang grown out of the ancient. Our standard dictionaries
give, of course, none but conjectural etymologies. Another word,
bamboozle, has been a sore difficulty with lexicographers. It is not in
the old dictionaries, although it is extensively used in familiar or
popular language for the last two centuries; and is, in fact, the very
kind of word that such writers as Swift, Butler, L’Estrange, and
Arbuthnot would pick out at once as a telling and most serviceable term.
It is, as we have seen, from the Gipsy; and here we must state that it
was Boucher who first drew attention to the fact, although in his
remarks on the dusky tongue he has made an evident mistake by concluding
it to be identical with its offspring, Cant. Other parallel instances,
with but slight variations from the old Gipsy meanings, might be
mentioned; but sufficient examples have been adduced to show that
Marsden, a great Oriental scholar in the last century, when he declared
before the Society of Antiquaries that the Cant of English thieves and
beggars had nothing to do with the language spoken by the despised
Gipsies, was in error. Had the Gipsy tongue been analysed and committed
to writing three centuries ago, there is every probability that many
scores of words now in common use could be at once traced to its source,
having been adopted as our language has developed towards its present
shape through many varied paths. Instances continually occur nowadays of
street vulgarisms ascending to the drawing-rooms of respectable society.
Who, then, can doubt that the Gipsy-vagabond alliance of three centuries
ago has contributed its quota of common words to popular speech?

Thomas Moore, in a humorous little book, _Tom Crib’s Memorial to
Congress_, 1819, says, “The Gipsy language, with the exception of such
terms as relate to their own peculiar customs, differs but little from
the regular Flash or Cant language.” But this was magnifying the
importance of the alliance. Moore, we should think, knew nothing of the
Gipsy tongue other than the few Cant words put into the mouths of the
beggars in Beaumont and Fletcher’s _Comedy of the Beggar’s Bush_, and
Ben Jonson’s _Masque of the Gipsies Metamorphosed_,—hence his
confounding Cant with Gipsy speech, and appealing to the Glossary of
Cant for so-called “Gipsy” words at the end of the _Life of Bamfylde
Moore Carew_, to bear him out in his assertion. Still his remark bears
much truth, and proof of this would have been found long ago if any
scholar had taken the trouble to examine the “barbarous jargon of Cant,”
and to have compared it with Gipsy speech. George Borrow, in his
_Account of the Gipsies in Spain_, thus eloquently concludes his second
volume; speaking of the connexion of the Gipsies with Europeans, he
says:—“Yet from this temporary association were produced two results;
European fraud became sharpened by coming into contact with Asiatic
craft; whilst European tongues, by imperceptible degrees, became
recruited with various words (some of them wonderfully expressive), many
of which have long been stumbling-blocks to the philologist, who, whilst
stigmatizing them as words of mere vulgar invention, or of unknown
origin, has been far from dreaming that a little more research or
reflection would have proved their affinity to the Sclavonic, Persian,
or Romaic, or perhaps to the mysterious object of his veneration, the
Sanscrit, the sacred tongue of the palm-covered regions of Ind; words
originally introduced into Europe by objects too miserable to occupy for
a moment his lettered attention—the despised denizens of the tents of
Roma.” These words might with very little alteration be ascribed to the
subject of which this volume is supposed—indeed hoped—to be a
handbook.

But the Gipsies, their speech, their character—bad enough, as all the
world testifies, but yet not devoid of redeeming qualities—their
history, and their religious belief, have been totally disregarded, and
their poor persons buffeted and jostled about until it is a wonder that
any trace of origin or national speech remains. On the Continent they
received better attention at the hands of learned men. Their language
was taken down in writing and examined, their history was traced, and
their extraordinary customs and practice of living in the open air, and
eating raw, and often putrid meat, were explained. They ate reptiles and
told fortunes because they had learnt to do so through their forefathers
centuries back in Hindostan; and they devoured carrion because the
Hindoo proverb—“That which God kills is better than that killed by
man”[10]—was still in their remembrance. This is the sort of proverb,
we should imagine, that would hardly commend itself to any one who had
not an unnatural and ghoule-like tendency anxious for full development.
Grellman, a learned German, was their principal historian, and to him,
and those who have followed him, we are almost entirely indebted for the
little we know of their language. The first European settlement of the
Gipsies was in the provinces adjoining the Danube, Moldau and
Theiss, where M. Cogalniceano, in his _Essai sur les Cigains de la
Moldo-Valachie_, estimates them at 200,000. Not a few of our ancient and
modern Cant and Slang terms are Wallachian and Greek words, picked up by
these wanderers from the East, and added to their common stock.

Gipsy, then, started, and was partially merged into Cant; and the old
story told by Harrison and others, that the first inventor of canting
was hanged for his pains, would seem to be a humorous invention, for
jargon as it is, it was doubtless of gradual formation, like all other
languages or systems of speech. Most of the modern Gipsies know the old
Cant words as well as their own tongue—or rather what remains of it. As
Borrow says, “The dialect of the English Gipsies is mixed with English
words.”[11] Those of the tribe who frequent fairs, and mix with English
tramps, readily learn the new words, as they are adopted by what Harman
calls “the fraternity of vagabonds.” Indeed, the old Cant is a common
language to the vagrants of many descriptions and every possible origin
who are scattered over the British Isles.

English Cant has its mutabilities like every other system of speech, and
is considerably altered since the first dictionary was compiled by
Harman in 1566. A great many words are unknown in the present tramps’
and thieves’ vernacular. Some of them, however, still bear their old
definitions, while others have adopted fresh meanings. “Abraham-man” is
yet seen in our modern “sham Abraham,” or “play the old
soldier”—_i.e._, to feign sickness or distress. “Autum” is still a
church or chapel amongst Gipsies; and “beck,” a constable, is our modern
Cant and Slang “beak,” once a policeman, but now a magistrate. “Bene,”
or “bone,” stands for good in Seven Dials and the back streets of
Westminster; and “bowse” is our modern “booze,” to drink or fuddle. A
“bowsing ken” was the old Cant term for a public-house; and “boozing
ken,” in modern Cant, has precisely the same meaning. There is little
doubt, though, that the pronunciations were always as they are now, so
far at least as these two instances are concerned. “Cassan” is both old
and modern Cant for cheese; the same may be said of “chattes,” or
“chatts,” the gallows. “Cofe,” or “cove,” is still a vulgar synonym for
a man. “Dudes” was Cant for clothes; we now say “duds.” “Flag” is still
a fourpenny-piece; and “fylche” means to rob. “Ken” is a house, and
“lick” means to thrash; “prancer” is yet known amongst rogues as a
horse; and to “prig,” amongst high and low, is to steal. Three centuries
ago, if one beggar said anything disagreeable to another, the person
annoyed would say, “Stow you,” or hold your peace; low people now say,
“Stow it,” equivalent to “Be quiet.” There is, so far as the Slang goes,
no actual difference in the use of these phrases, the variation being in
the pronouns—in fact, in the direction. “Trine” is still to hang; “wyn”
yet stands for a penny. And many other words, as will be seen in the
Dictionary, still retain their ancient meaning.

As specimens of those words which have altered their original Cant
signification, may be instanced “chete,” now written cheat. “Chete” was
in ancient Cant what _chop_ is in the Canton-Chinese—an almost
inseparable adjunct. Everything was termed a “chete,” and qualified by a
substantive-adjective, which showed what kind of a “chete” was meant;
for instance, “crashing-chetes” were teeth; a “moffling-chete,” was a
napkin; a “topping-chete,” was the gallows, and a “grunting-chete,” was
a pig. Cheat nowadays means to cozen or defraud, and lexicographers have
tortured etymology for an original—but without success. _Escheats_ and
_escheatours_ have been named, but with great doubts; indeed, Stevens,
the learned commentator on Shakspeare, acknowledged that he “did not
recollect to have met with the word cheat in our ancient writers.”[12]
Cheat, to defraud, then, is no other than an old Cant term somewhat
altered in its meaning,[13] and as such it should be described in the
next etymological dictionary. Another instance of a change in the
meaning of the old Cant, but the retention of the word, is seen in
“cly,” formerly to take or steal, now a pocket; and with the remembrance
of a certain class of low characters, a curious connexion between the
two meanings is discovered. “Make” was a halfpenny: we now say
“mag,”—“make” being modern Cant for getting money by any possible
means, their apophthegm being—“Get money the best way you can, but
_make_ it somehow.” “Milling” stood for stealing; it ultimately became a
pugilistic term, and then faded into nothingness, “the cove wot loves a
mill,” being a thing of the past. “Nab” was a head,—low people now say
“nob,” the former meaning, in modern Cant, to steal or seize. “Pek” was
meat,—we still say “peckish,” when hungry. “Peckish” is though more
likely to be derived from the action of birds when eating, as all slang
has its origin in metaphor. “Prygges, dronken Tinkers or beastly
people,” as old Harman wrote, would scarcely be understood now; a
“prig,” in the 19th century, is a pickpocket or thief. He is also a
mean, contemptible little “cuss,” who is not, as a rule, found in low
life, but who could be very well spared from that of the middle and
upper classes. “Quier,” or “queer,” like cheat, was a very common
prefix, and meant bad or wicked,—it now means odd, curious, or strange;
but to the ancient Cant we are possibly indebted for the word, which
etymologists should remember.[14] “Rome,” or “rum,” formerly meant good,
or of the first quality, and was extensively used like cheat and
queer,—indeed as an adjective it was the opposite of the latter. “Rum”
now means curious, and is synonymous with queer; thus,—“rummy old
bloke,” or a “queer old man.” Here again we see the origin of an
every-day word, scouted by lexicographers and snubbed by respectable
persons, but still a word of frequent and popular use. “Yannam” meant
bread; “pannum” is the word now. Other instances could be pointed out,
but they will be observed in the Dictionary.

Several words are entirely obsolete. “Alybbeg” no longer means a bed,
nor “askew” a cup. “Booget,”[15] nowadays, would not be understood for a
basket; neither would “gan” pass current for mouth. “Fullams” was the
old Cant term for false or loaded dice, and although used by Shakspeare
in this sense, is now unknown and obsolete. Indeed, as Moore somewhere
remarks, the present Greeks of St. Giles’s themselves would be
thoroughly puzzled by many of the ancient canting songs,—taking, for
example, the first verse of an old favourite—

    “Bing out, bien Morts, and toure and toure,
      Bing out, bien Morts, and toure;
    For all your duds are bing’d awast;
      The bien cove hath the loure.”[16]

But perhaps we cannot do better than present to the reader at once an
entire copy of the first Canting Dictionary ever compiled. As before
mentioned, it was the work of one Thomas Harman, who lived in the days
of Queen Elizabeth. Some writers have remarked that Decker[17] was the
first to compile a dictionary of the vagabonds’ tongue; whilst
Borrow[18] and Moore stated that Richard Head performed that service in
his _Life of an English Rogue_, published in the year 1680. All these
statements are equally incorrect, for the first attempt was made more
than a century before the latter work was issued. The quaint spelling
and old-fashioned phraseology are preserved, and the initiated will
quickly recognise many vulgar street words as old acquaintances dressed
in antique garb.[19]

    ~Abraham-men~ be those that fayn themselves to have beene mad, and
    have bene kept either in Bethelem, or in some other pryson a good
    time.

    ~Alybbeg~, a bedde.

    ~Askew~, a cuppe.

    ~Autem~, a churche.

    ~Autem mortes~, married women as chaste as a cowe.

    ~Baudye baskets~ bee women who goe with baskets and capcases on
    their armes, wherein they have laces, pinnes, nedles, whyte inkel,
    and round sylke gyrdels of all colours.

    ~Beck~ [Beak, a magistrate], a constable.

    ~Belly-chete~, apron.

    ~Bene~, good. _Benar_, better.

    ~Benship~, very good.

    ~Bleting chete~, a calfe or sheepe.

    ~Booget~, a travelling tinker’s baskete.

    ~Borde~, a shilling.

    ~Boung~, a purse. [_Friesic_, pong; _Wallachian_, punga.] The oldest
    form of this word is in Ulphilas, puggs; it exists also in the
    _Greek_, πουγγὴ.

    ~Bowse~, drink.

    ~Bowsing ken~, an alehouse.

    ~Bufe~ [Buffer, a man], a dogge.

    ~Bynge a waste~ [Avast, get out of the way] go you hence.

    ~Cackling chete~, a coke [cock], or capon.

    ~Cassan~ [Cassam], cheese.

    ~Casters~ [Castor, a hat], a cloake.

    ~Cateth~, “the vpright Cofe _cateth_ to the Roge” [probably a
    shortening or misprint of _Canteth_].

    ~Chattes~, the gallowes.

    ~Chete~ [see what has been previously said about this word.]

    ~Cly~ [a pocket], to take, receive, or have.

    ~Cofe~ [cove], a person.

    ~Commission~ [mish], a shirt.

    ~Counterfet cranke~, these that do counterfet the Cranke be yong
    knaves and yonge harlots, that deeply dissemble the falling
    sickness.

    ~Cranke~ [cranky, foolish], falling evil [or wasting sickness].

    ~Crashing chetes~, teeth.

    ~Cuffen~, a manne. [A _cuif_ in Northumberland and Scotland
    signifies a lout or awkward fellow.]

    ~Darkemans~, the night.

    ~Dell~, a yonge wench.

    ~Dewse a vyle~, the countrey.

    ~Dock~, to deflower.

    ~Doxes~, harlots.

    ~Drawers~, hosen.

    ~Dudes~ [or duds], clothes.

    ~Fambles~, handes.

    ~Fambling chete~, a ring on one’s hand.

    ~Flagg~, a groat.

    ~Frater~, a beggar wyth a false paper.

    ~Freshe water mariners~, these kind of caterpillers counterfet great
    losses on the sea:—their shippes were drowned in the playne of
    Salisbury.

    ~Fylche~, to robbe: Fylch-man, a robber.

    ~Gage~, a quart pot.

    ~Gan~, a mouth.

    ~Gentry cofe~, a noble or gentle man.

    ~Gentry cofes ken~, a noble or gentle man’s house.

    ~Gentry mort~, a noble or gentle woman.

    ~Gerry~, excrement.

    ~Glasyers~, eyes.

    ~Glymmar~, fyer.

    ~Grannam~, corne.

    ~Grunting chete~, a pygge.

    ~Gyb~, a writing.

    ~Gyger~ [jigger], a dore.

    ~Hearing chetes~, eares.

    ~Jarke~, a seale.

    ~Jarkeman~, one who makes writings and sets seales for [counterfeit]
    licences and passports.

    ~Ken~, a house.

    ~Kynchen co~ [or cove], a young boye trained up like a “Kynching
    Morte.” [From the German diminutive, _Kindschen_.]

    ~Kynching morte~, is a little gyrle, carried at their mother’s backe
    in a slate, or sheete, who brings them up sauagely.

    ~Lag~, water.

    ~Lag of dudes~, a bucke [or basket] of clothes.

    ~Lage~, to washe.

    ~Lap~, butter mylke, or whey.

    ~Lightmans~, the day.

    ~Lowing chete~, a cowe.

    ~Lowre~, money. [From the Wallachian Gipsy word LOWE, coined money.
    _See_ M. Cogalniceano’s _Essai sur les Cigains de la
    Moldo-Valachie_.]

    ~Lubbares~,—“sturdy Lubbares,” country bumpkins, or men of a low
    degree.

    ~Lyb-beg~, a bed.

    ~Lycke~ [lick], to beate.

    ~Lyp~, to lie down.

    ~Lypken~, a house to lye in.

    ~Make~ [mag], a halfpenny.

    ~Margeri prater~, a hen.

    ~Milling~, to steale [by sending a child in at a window].

    ~Moffling chete~, a napkin.

    ~Mortes~ [mots], harlots.

    ~Myll~, to robbe.

    ~Mynt~, gold.

    ~Nab~ [nob], a heade.

    ~Nabchet~, a hat or cap.

    ~Nase~, dronken.

    ~Nosegent~, a nunne.

    ~Pallyard~, a borne beggar [who counterfeits sickness, or incurable
    sores. They are mostly Welshmen, Harman says.]

    ~Param~, mylke.

    ~Patrico~, a priest.

    ~Patricos kinchen~, a pygge. [A satirical hit at the church, PATRICO
    meaning a parson or priest, and KINCHEN his little boy or girl.]

    ~Pek~, meat.

    ~Poppelars~, porrage.

    ~Prat~, a buttocke. [This word has its equivalent in modern slang.]

    ~Pratling chete~, a toung.

    ~Prauncer~, a horse.

    ~Prigger of prauncers~ be horse-stealers, for to prigge signifieth
    in their language to steale, and a PRAUNCER is a horse, so being put
    together, the matter was playn. [Thus writes old Thomas Harman, who
    concludes his description of this order of “pryggers,” by very
    quietly saying, “I had the best gelding stolen out of my pasture,
    that I had amongst others, whyle this book was first a-printing.”]

    ~Prygges~, dronken tinkers, or beastly people.

    ~Quacking chete~, a drake or duck.

    ~Quaromes~, a body.

    ~Quier~ [queer], badde. [_See ante_.]

    ~Quier cuffin~, the justice of peace.

    ~Quyer crampringes~, boltes or fetters.

    ~Quyer kyn~, a pryson house.

    ~Red shanke~, a drake or ducke.

    ~Roger~, a goose.

    ~Rome~, goode [now curious, noted, or remarkable in any way. _Rum_
    is the modern orthography].

    ~Rome bouse~ [rum booze], wyne. [A name probably applied by canters
    coming on it for the first time, and tasting it suddenly.]

    ~Rome mort~, the Queene [Elizabeth].

    ~Rome vyle~ [Rum-ville], London.

    ~Ruff peck~, baken [short bread, common in old times at
    farm-houses].

    ~Ruffmans~, the wood or bushes.

    ~Salomon~, an alter or masse.

    ~Skypper~, a barne.

    ~Slate~, a sheete or shetes.

    ~Smelling chete~, a nose.

    ~Smelling chete~, a garden or orchard.

    ~Snowt fayre~ [said of a woman who has a pretty face or is comely].

    ~Stall~ [to initiate a beggar or rogue into the rights and
    privileges of the canting order. Harman relates that when an upright
    man, or initiated first-class rogue, “mete any beggar, whether he be
    sturdy or impotent, he will demand of him whether ever he was
    ‘stalled to the roge,’ or no. If he say he was, he will know of
    whom, and his name yt stalled him. And if he be not learnedly able
    to shew him the whole circumstance thereof, he will spoyle him of
    his money, either of his best garment, if it be worth any money, and
    haue him to the bowsing-ken: which is, to some typling house next
    adjoyninge, and layth there to gage the best thing that he hath for
    twenty pence or two shillings: this man obeyeth for feare of
    beatinge. Then dooth this upright man call for a gage of bowse,
    which is a quarte potte of drink, and powres the same vpon his peld
    pate, adding these words,—I, _G.P._, do stalle thee, _W.T._, to
    the Roge, and that from henceforth it shall be lawfull for thee to
    cant, that is, to aske or begge for thi liuing in al places.”]

    ~Stampers~, shoes.

    ~Stampes~, legges.

    ~Stauling ken~, a house that will receyue stollen wares.

    ~Stawlinge kens~, tippling-houses.

    ~Stow you~ [stow it], hold your peace.

    ~Strike~, to steale.

    ~Strommell~, strawe.

    ~Swadder~, or PEDLER [a man who hawks goods].

    ~The high pad~, the highway.

    ~The ruffian cly thee~, the devil take thee.

    ~Togemans~ [tog], cloake.

    ~Togman~, a coate.

    ~To bowse~, to drinke.

    ~To cant~, to speake.

    ~To cly the gerke~, to be whipped.

    ~To couch a hogshead~, to lie down and slepe.

    ~To cut bene whyddes~, to speake or give good words.

    ~To cut benle~, to speak gentle.

    ~To cutte~, to say.

    ~To cutte quyer whyddes~, to giue euil words or euil language.

    ~To dup ye gyger~ [jigger], to open the dore.

    ~To fylche~, to robbe.

    ~To heue a bough~, to robbe or rifle a boweth [booth].

    ~To maunde~, to aske or require.

    ~To mill a ken~, to robbe a house.

    ~Tonygle~ [coition].

    ~To nyp a boung~, [nip, to steal], to cut a purse.

    ~To skower the crampringes~, to weare boltes or fetters.

    ~To stall~, to make or ordain.

    ~To the ruffian~, to the Devil.

    ~To towre~, to see.

    ~Tryning~, hanging.

    ~Tyb of the butery~, a goose.

    ~Walking morte~, womene [who pass for widows].

    ~Wapping~ [coition].

    ~Whyddes~, wordes.

    ~Wyn~, a penny. [A correspondent of _Notes and Queries_ suggests the
    connexion of this word with the Welsh, GWYN, white—_i.e._, the
    white silver penny. _See_ other examples under BLUNT, in the
    Dictionary; cf. also the Armorican, “GWENNEK,” a penny.]

    ~Yannam~, bread.

Turning attention more to the Cant of modern times, in connexion with
the old, it will be found that words have been drawn into the thieves’
vocabulary from every conceivable source. Hard or infrequent words,
vulgarly termed “crack-jaw,” or “jaw-breakers,” were very often used and
considered as Cant terms. And here it should be mentioned that at the
present day the most inconsistent and far-fetched terms are often used
for secret purposes, when they are known to be caviare to the million.
It is strange that such words as incongruous, insipid, interloper,
intriguing, indecorum, forestall, equip, hush, grapple, &c., &c., were
current Cant words a century and a half ago, if we are to judge by the
Dictionary of Canting Words at the end of _Bacchus and Venus_,[20] 1737.
It is but fair, however, to assume that the compiler of the dictionary
was but trading on the demand for Cant phrases, and was humbugging his
readers. The terms are inserted not as jokes or squibs, but as
selections from the veritable pocket dictionaries of the Jack Sheppards
and Dick Turpins of the day. If they were safely used as unknown and
cabalistic terms amongst the commonalty, the fact would form a very
curious illustration of the ignorance of our poor ancestors; but it
would be unfair and, indeed, idiotic to assume this without much
stronger proof than the book in question gives of itself.

Amongst those Cant words which have either altered their meanings, or
have become extinct, may be cited lady, formerly the Cant for “a very
crooked, deformed, and ill-shapen woman;”[21] and Harman, “a pair of
stocks, or a constable.” The former is a pleasant piece of sarcasm,
whilst the latter indicates a singular method of revenge, or else of
satire. Harman was the first author who specially wrote against English
vagabonds, and for his trouble his name, we are told, became synonymous
with a pair of stocks, or a policeman of the olden time.

Apart from the Gipsy element, we find that Cant abounds in terms from
foreign languages, and that it exhibits signs of a growth similar to
that of most recognised and completely-formed tongues,—the gathering of
words from foreign sources. In the reign of Elizabeth and of King James
I., several Dutch, Flemish, and Spanish words were introduced by
soldiers who had served in the Low Countries and sailors who had
returned from the Spanish Main, who, like “mine ancient Pistol,” were
fond of garnishing their speech with outlandish phrases. Many of these
were soon picked up and adopted by vagabonds and tramps in their Cant
language. The Anglo-Norman and the Anglo-Saxon, the Scotch, the French,
the Italian, and even the classic languages of ancient Italy and Greece,
besides the various provincial dialects of England, have contributed to
its list of words. Indeed, as has been remarked, English Cant seems to
be formed on the same basis as the Argot of the French and the
Roth-Sprach of the Germans—partly metaphorical, and partly by the
introduction of such corrupted foreign terms as are likely to be unknown
to the society amid which the Cant speakers exist. Argot is the London
thieves’ word for their secret language; it is, of course, from the
French, but that matters not, so long as it is incomprehensible to the
police and the mob. “Booze,” or “bouse,” is supposed to come from the
Dutch _buysen_, though the word has been in use in England for some
hundreds of years. “Domine,” a parson, is from the Spanish. “Donna and
feeles,” a woman and children, is from the Latin; and “don,” a clever
fellow, has been filched from the Lingua Franca, or bastard Italian,
although it sounds like an odd mixture of Spanish and French; whilst
“duds,” the vulgar term for clothes, may have been pilfered either from
the Gaelic or the Dutch. “Feele,” a daughter, from the French; and
“frow,” a girl or wife, from the German—are common tramps’ terms. So
are “gent,” silver, from the French _argent_; and “vial,” a country
town, also from the French. “Horrid-horn,” a fool, is believed to be
from the Erse; and “gloak,” a man, from the Scotch. As stated before,
the dictionary will supply numerous other instances.

The Celtic languages have contributed many Cant and vulgar words to our
popular vocabulary. These have come to us through the Gaelic and Irish
languages, so closely allied in their material as to be merely dialects
of a primitive common tongue. This element may arise from the Celtic
portion of our population, which, from its position as slaves or
servants to its ancient conquerors, has contributed so largely to the
lowest class of the community, therefore to our Slang, provincial, or
colloquial words; or it may be an importation from Irish immigrants, who
have contributed their fair proportion to our criminal stock.

There is one source, however, of secret street terms which in the first
edition of this work was entirely overlooked,—indeed, it was unknown to
the original compiler until pointed out by a correspondent,—the Lingua
Franca, or bastard Italian, spoken at Genoa, Trieste, Malta,
Constantinople, Smyrna, Alexandria, and all Mediterranean seaport towns.
The ingredients of this imported Cant are, as its name denotes, many.
Its foundation is Italian, with a mixture of modern Greek, German (from
the Austrian ports), Spanish, Turkish, and French. It has been
introduced to the notice of the London wandering tribes by the sailors,
foreign and English, who trade to and from the Mediterranean seaports,
but it must not be confounded with the mixture of Irish, English, and
Italian spoken in neighbourhoods like Saffron Hill and Leather Lane,
which are thronged with swarms of organ-grinders from all parts of
Italy, and makers of images from Rome and Florence,—all of whom, in
these dense thoroughfares, mingle with our lower orders. It would occupy
too much space here to give a list of the words used in either of these
Babel-like tongues, especially as the principal of them are noted in the
dictionary.

“There are several Hebrew terms in our Cant language, obtained, it
would appear, from the intercourse of the thieves with the Jew fences
(receivers of stolen goods); many of the Cant terms, again, are
Sanscrit, got from the Gipsies; many Latin, got by the beggars from the
Catholic prayers before the Reformation; and many again, Italian, got
from the wandering musicians and others; indeed, the showmen have but
lately introduced a number of Italian phrases into their Cant
language.”[22] The Hindostanee also contributes several words, and these
have been introduced by the Lascar sailors, who come over here in the
East Indiamen, and often lodge during their stay in the low tramps’
houses at the East-end of London. Speaking of the learned tongues, it
may be mentioned that, precarious and abandoned as the vagabonds’
existence is, many persons of classical or refined education have from
time to time joined the nomadic ranks,—occasionally from inclination,
as in the popular instance of Bamfylde Moore Carew, but generally
through indiscretions, which involve pecuniary difficulty and loss of
character.[23] This will in some measure account for numerous classical
and learned words figuring as Cant terms in the vulgar dictionary.

In the early part of the last century, when highwaymen and footpads were
plentiful, and when the dangerous classes were in larger proportion to
the bulk of the population than they are now, a great many new words
were added to the canting vocabulary, whilst several old terms fell into
disuse. “Cant,” for instance, as applied to thieves’ talk, was
supplanted by the word “flash.” In the North of England the Cant
employed by tramps and thieves is known as “Gammy.” It is mainly from
the old Gipsy corrupted. In the large towns of Ireland and Scotland this
secret language is also spoken, with of course additions peculiar to
each locality. All those words derived from “gammy” are inserted in the
dictionary as from the North country.

A singular feature, however, in vulgar language is the retention and the
revival of sterling old English words, long since laid up in ancient
manuscripts. Disraeli somewhere says, “The purest source of neology is
in the revival of old words”—

    “Words that wise Bacon or brave Rawleigh spake;”

and Dr. Latham remarks that “the thieves of London are the conservators
of Anglo-Saxonisms.” A young gentleman from Belgravia, who had lost his
watch or his pocket-handkerchief, would scarcely remark to his mamma
that it had been “boned”—yet “bone,” in old times, meant, amongst high
and low, to steal. And a young lady living in the precincts of dingy but
aristocratic Mayfair, although enraptured with a Jenny Lind or a
Ristori, would hardly think of turning back in the box to inform papa
that she (Ristori or Lind) “made no ‘bones’ of it”—yet the phrase was
most respectable and well-to-do before it met with a change of
circumstances. Possibly fashion, in its journey from east to west, left
certain phrases and metaphors behind, which being annexed by the
newcomers, sank gradually in the social scale until they ultimately
passed out of the written language altogether, and became “flash” or
Slang. “A ‘crack’ article,” however first-rate, would have greatly
displeased Dr. Johnson and Mr. Walker—yet both crack, in the sense of
excellent, and crack up, to boast or praise, were not considered
vulgarisms in the time of Henry VIII. The former term is used frequently
nowadays, as a kind of polite and modified Slang—as a “crack” regiment,
a “crack” shot, &c. “Dodge,” a cunning trick, is from the Anglo-Saxon;
and ancient nobles used to “get each other’s ‘dander’ up” before
appealing to their swords,—quite “flabbergasting” (also a respectable
old word) the half-score of lookers-on with the thumps and cuts of their
heavy weapons. “Gallivanting,” waiting upon the ladies, was as polite in
expression as in action; whilst a clergyman at Paule’s Crosse thought
nothing of bidding a noisy hearer “hold his ‘gab,’” or “shut up his
‘gob.’” But then the essence of preaching was to indulge in idiomatic
phrases and colloquialisms—a practice now almost peculiar to itinerant
“ranters.” “Gadding,” roaming about in an idle and vacant manner, was
used in an old translation of the Bible; and “to do anything ‘gingerly’”
was to do it with great care. Persons of modern affected tastes will be
shocked to know that the great Lord Bacon spoke of the lower part of a
man’s face as his “gills,” though the expression is not more
objectionable than the generality of metaphor, and is considerably more
respectable than many words admitted to the genteel—we use the word
advisedly—vocabulary.

Shakspeare also used many words which are now counted dreadfully vulgar.
“‘Clean’ gone,” in the sense of out of sight, or entirely away; “you
took me all ‘a-mort,’” or confounded me; “it wont ‘fadge,’” or suit, are
phrases taken at random from the great dramatist’s works. These phrases
are the natural outcome of the poet’s truth to life in the characters he
portrayed. A London costermonger, or inhabitant of the streets, instead
of saying, “I’ll make him yield,” or “give in,” in a fight or contest,
would say, “I’ll make him ‘buckle’ under.” Shakspeare in his _Henry the
Fourth_ (part ii. act i. scene 1), has the word; and Mr. Halliwell, one
of the greatest and most industrious of living antiquaries, informs us
that “the commentators do not supply another example.” If Shakspeare was
not a pugilist, he certainly anticipated the terms of the prize-ring—or
they were respectable words before the prize-ring was thought of—for he
has “pay,” to beat or thrash, and “pepper,” with a similar meaning; also
“fancy,” in the sense of pets and favourites,—pugilists are often
termed “the ‘fancy.’” The origin of the term, as applied to them, has,
however, never been satisfactorily decided, though Pierce Egan and
others since his time have speculated ingeniously on the subject. The
Cant word “prig,” from the Saxon _priccan_, to filch, is also
Shakspearian; so, indeed, is “piece,” a contemptuous term for a young
woman. Shakspeare was not the only vulgar dramatist of his time. Ben
Jonson, Beaumont and Fletcher, Brome, and other play-writers,
occasionally, and very naturally, put Cant words into the mouths of
their low characters, or employed old words which have since degenerated
into vulgarisms. “Crusty,” poor tempered; “two of a kidney,” two of a
sort; “lark,” a piece of fun; “lug,” to pull; “bung,” to give or pass;
“pickle,” a sad plight; “frump,” to mock, are a few specimens casually
picked from the works of the old histrionic writers.

One old English mode of canting, simple enough, but affected only by the
most miserable impostors, was the inserting a consonant betwixt each
syllable; thus, taking _g_, “How do you do?” would be “How_g_ do_g_
you_g_ do_g_?” The name very properly given to this disagreeable
nonsense, we are informed by Grose, was gibberish.

Another slang has been manufactured by transposing the initial letters
of words, so that a mutton chop becomes a _ch_utton _m_op, and a pint of
stout a _st_int of _p_out; but it is satisfactory to know that it has
gained no ground, as it is remarkable for nothing so much as poverty of
resource on the part of its inventors. This is called “Marrowskying,” or
“Medical Greek,” from its use by medical students at the hospitals.
Albert Smith termed it the “Gower Street Dialect,” and referred to it
occasionally in his best-known works.

The “Language of Ziph,” it may be noted, is another rude mode of
disguising English, in use among the students at Winchester College.
Some notices of this method of conveying secret information, with an
extensive Glossary of the Words, Phrases, Customs, &c., peculiar to the
College, may be found in Mr. Mansfield’s _School Life at Winchester
College_. It is certainly too puerile a specimen of work to find place
here.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] “Swarms of vagabonds, whose eyes were so sharp as Lynx.”—_Bullein’s
Simples and Surgery_, 1562.

[2] Probably from the Gipsies, who were supposed to come from Germany
into Spain.

[3] From _Roter_, beggar, vagabond, and _wälsch_, foreign. See
Dictionary of Gipsy language in Pott’s _Zigeuner in Europa und Asien_,
vol. ii., Halle, 1844. The Italian cant is called Fourbesque, and the
Portuguese Calao. See Francisque-Michel, _Dictionnaire d’Argot_, Paris,
1856.

[4] Richardson’s _Dictionary_.

[5] _Description of England_, prefixed to Holinshed’s _Chronicle_.

[6] The word Slang, as will be seen in the chapter upon that subject, is
purely a Gipsy term, although nowadays it refers to low or vulgar
language of any kind, other than cant. Slang and Gibberish in the Gipsy
language are synonymous; but, as English adoptions, have meanings very
different from that given to them in their original.

[7] “The vulgar tongue consists of two parts; the first is the Cant
language; the second, those burlesque phrases, quaint allusions,
and nicknames for persons, things, and places, which, from long
uninterrupted usage, are made classical by prescription.”—Grose’s
_Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue_, 1st edition, 1785.

[8] “Outlandish people calling themselves Egyptians.”—1530.

[9] Jabber may be, after all, only another form of GABBER, GAB, very
common in Old English, from the _Anglo-Saxon_, GÆBBAN.

[10] This very proverb was mentioned by a young Gipsy to Crabb, some
years ago.—_Gipsies’ Advocate_, p. 14.

[11] _Gipsies in Spain_, vol. i. p. 18.

[12] Shaks. _Henry IV._, part ii. act ii. scene 4.

[13] It is but fair to imagine that cheat ultimately became synonymous
with “fraud,” when we remember that it was one of the most common words
of the greatest class of impostors in the country.

[14] We are aware that more than one eminent philologist states that the
origin of “queer” is seen in the German _quer_, crooked,—hence strange
and abnormal. While agreeing with this etymology, we have reason to
believe that the word was first used in this country in a Cant sense.

[15] Booget properly signifies a leathern wallet, and is probably
derived from the _low Latin_, BULGA. A tinker’s budget is from the same
source.

[16] Which, freely translated into modern Slang, might read—especially
to those who know the manners and customs of the Dialites—thus:

    “Good girls, go out, and look about,
      Good girls, go out and see;
    For every clout is up the spout,
      The bloke’s gone on the spree.”

[17] Who wrote about the year 1610.

[18] _Gipsies in Spain_, vol. i. p. 18. Borrow further commits himself
by remarking that “Head’s Vocabulary has always been accepted as the
speech of the English Gipsies.” Nothing of the kind. Head professed to
have lived with the Gipsies, but in reality filched his words from
Decker and Brome.

[19] The modern meanings of a few of the old Cant words are given within
brackets.

[20] This is a curious volume, and is worth from one to two guineas. The
Canting Dictionary was afterwards reprinted, word for word, with the
title of _The Scoundrel’s Dictionary_, in 1751. It was originally
published, without date, about the year 1710, by B. E., under the title
of _A Dictionary of the Canting Crew_.

[21] _Bacchus and Venus._—1737.

[22] _London Labour and the London Poor._

[23] Mayhew (vol. i. p. 217) speaks of a low lodging-house “in which
there were at one time five university men, three surgeons, and several
sorts of broken-down clerks.” But old Harman’s saying, that “a wylde
Roge is he that is _borne_ a roge,” will perhaps explain this seeming
anomaly. There is, whatever may be the reason, no disputing the truth of
this latter statement, as there is not, we venture to say, a common
lodging-house in London without broken-down gentlemen, who have been
gentlemen very often far beyond the conventional application of the term
to any one with a good coat on his back and money in his pocket.




ACCOUNT

OF THE

HIEROGLYPHICS USED BY VAGABONDS.


One of the most singular chapters in a history of vagabondism would
certainly be “An Account of the Hieroglyphic Signs used by Tramps and
Thieves,” and it certainly would not be the least interesting. The
reader may be startled to know that, in addition to a secret language,
the wandering tribes of this country have private marks and symbols with
which to score their successes, failures, and advice to succeeding
beggars; in fact, there is no doubt that the country is really dotted
over with beggars’ finger-posts and guide-stones. The subject was not
long since brought under the attention of the Government by Mr.
Rawlinson.[24] “There is,” he says in his report, “a sort of
blackguards’ literature, and the initiated understand each other by
Slang [Cant] terms, by pantomimic signs, and by hieroglyphics. The
vagrant’s mark may be seen in Havant, on corners of streets, on
door-posts, on house-steps. Simple as these chalk-lines appear, they
inform the succeeding vagrants of all they require to know; and a few
white scratches may say, ‘Be importunate,’ or ‘Pass on.’”

Another very curious account was taken from a provincial newspaper,
published in 1849, and forwarded to _Notes and Queries_,[25] under the
head of Mendicant Freemasonry. “Persons,” remarks the writer,
“indiscreet enough to open their purses to the relief of the beggar
tribe, would do well to take a readily-learned lesson as to the folly of
that misguided benevolence which encourages and perpetuates vagabondism.
Every door or passage is pregnant with instruction as to the error
committed by the patron of beggars; as the beggar-marks show that a
system of freemasonry is followed, by which a beggar knows whether it
will be worth his while to call into a passage or knock at a door. Let
any one examine the entrances to the passages in any town, and there he
will find chalk marks, unintelligible to him, but significant enough to
beggars. If a thousand towns are examined, the same marks will be found
at every passage entrance. The passage mark is a cypher with a twisted
tail; in some cases the tail projects into the passage, in others
outwardly; thus seeming to indicate whether the houses down the passage
are worth calling at or not. Almost every door has its marks; these are
varied. In some cases there is a cross on the brickwork, in others a
cypher; the figures ~1, 2, 3~ are also used. Every person may for
himself test the accuracy of these statements by the examination of the
brickwork near his own doorway—thus demonstrating that mendicity is a
regular trade, carried out upon a system calculated to save time, and
realize the largest profits.” These remarks refer mainly to provincial
towns, London being looked upon as the tramps’ home, and therefore too
“fly” or experienced to be duped by such means. The title it obtains,
that of “the Start,” or first place in everything, is significant of
this.

Provincial residents, who are more likely to view the foregoing extract
with an eye of suspicion than are those who live in a position
to constantly watch for and profit by evidences of the secret
intercommunication indulged in by the dangerous classes, should note, in
favour of the extract given, how significant is the practice of tramps
and beggars calling in unfrequented localities, and how obvious it is
that they are directed by a code of signals at once complete and
imperious. It is bad for a tramp who is discovered disobeying secret
orders. He is marked out and subjected to all kinds of annoyance by
means of decoy hieroglyphs, until his life becomes a burden to him, and
he is compelled to starve or—most horrible of alternatives—go to work.

The only other notice of the hieroglyphs of vagabonds worth remarking is
in Mayhew’s _London Labour and the London Poor_.[26] Mayhew obtained his
information from two tramps, who stated that hawkers employ these signs
as well as beggars. One tramp thus described the method of “working”[27]
a small town. “Two hawkers (‘pals’[27]) go together, but separate when
they enter a village, one taking one side of the road, and selling
different things, and so as to inform each other as to the character of
the people at whose houses they call, they chalk certain marks on their
door-posts.” Another informant stated that “if a ‘patterer’[27] has been
‘crabbed’” (that is, offended by refusal or exposure) “at any of the
‘cribs’” (houses), “he mostly chalks a signal at or near the door.”
These hawkers were not of the ordinary, but of the tramp, class, who
carried goods more as a blind to their real designs than for the
purposes of sale. They, in fact, represented the worst kinds of the two
classes. The law has comparatively recently improved these nondescript
gentry off the face of the country, and the hawker of the present day is
generally a man more sinned against than sinning.

Another use is also made of hieroglyphs. Charts of successful begging
neighbourhoods are rudely drawn, and symbolical signs attached to each
house to show whether benevolent or adverse.[28] “In many cases there is
over the kitchen mantelpiece” of a tramps’ lodging-house “a map of the
district, dotted here and there with memorandums of failure or success.”
A correct facsimile of one of these singular maps is given in this book.
It was obtained from the patterers and tramps who supplied a great many
words for this work, and who were employed by the original publisher in
collecting Old Ballads, Christmas Carols, Dying Speeches, and Last
Lamentations, as materials for a _History of Popular Literature_. The
reader will, no doubt, be amused with the drawing. The locality depicted
is near Maidstone, in Kent; and it was probably sketched by a wandering
Screever[29] in payment for a night’s lodging. The English practice of
marking everything, and scratching names on public property, extends
itself to the tribe of vagabonds. On the map, as may be seen in the
left-hand corner, some Traveller[29] has drawn a favourite or noted
female, singularly nicknamed Three-quarter Sarah. What were the peculiar
accomplishments of this lady to demand so uncommon a name, the reader
will be at a loss to discover; but a patterer says it probably refers to
a shuffling dance of that name, common in tramps’ lodging-houses, and in
which “3/4 Sarah” may have been a proficient. Above her, three beggars
or hawkers have reckoned their day’s earnings, amounting to 13s., and on
the right a tolerably correct sketch of a low hawker, or cadger, is
drawn. “To Dover, the _nigh_ way,” is the exact phraseology; and “hup
here,” a fair specimen of the self-acquired education of the
draughtsman. No key or explanation to the hieroglyphs was given in the
original, because it would have been superfluous, when every inmate of
the lodging-house knew the marks from his cradle—or rather his mother’s
back.

Should there be no map, in most lodging-houses there is an old man who
is guide to every “walk” in the vicinity, and who can tell on every
round each house that is “good for a cold tatur.” The hieroglyphs that
are used are:—

☓ ~No good~; too poor, and know too much.

◠+ ~Stop~,—If you have what they want, they will buy. They are pretty
“fly” (knowing).

⊃— ~Go in this direction~, it is better than the other road. Nothing
that way.

◇ ~Bone~ (good). Safe for a “cold tatur,” if for nothing else. “Cheese
your patter” (don’t talk much) here.

▽ ~Cooper’d~ (spoilt), by too many tramps calling there.

□ ~Gammy~ (unfavourable), like to have you taken up. Mind the dog.

⦿ ~Flummuxed~ (dangerous), sure of a month in “quod” (prison).

⊕ ~Religious~, but tidy on the whole.

Where did these signs come from? and when were they first used? are
questions which have been asked again and again, and the answers have
been many and various. Knowing the character of the Gipsies, and
ascertaining from a tramp that they are well acquainted with the
hieroglyphs, “and have been as long ago as ever he could remember,”
there is little fear of being wrong in ascribing the invention to them.
How strange it would be if some modern Belzoni, or Champollion—say Mr.
George Smith, for instance—discovered in these beggars’ marks traces of
ancient Egyptian or Hindoo sign-writing!

That the Gipsies were in the habit of leaving memorials of the road they
had taken, and the successes that had befallen them, is upon record. In
an old book, _The Triumph of Wit_, 1724, there is a passage which
appears to have been copied from some older work, and it runs
thus:—“The Gipsies set out twice a year, and scatter all over England,
each parcel having their appointed stages, that they may not interfere,
nor hinder each other; and for that purpose, when they set forward in
the country, they stick up boughs in the way of divers kinds, according
as it is agreed among them, that one company may know which way another
is gone, and so take another road.” The works of Hoyland and Borrow
supply other instances.

It would be hardly fair to close this subject without drawing attention
to the extraordinary statement that, actually on the threshold of the
gibbet, the sign of the vagabond was to be met with! “The murderer’s
signal is even exhibited from the gallows; as a red handkerchief held in
the hand of the felon about to be executed is a token that he dies
without having betrayed any professional secrets.”[30] Private
executions have of course rendered this custom obsolete, even if it
ever existed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Since the first editions of this work were published, the publishers
have received from various parts of England numerous evidences of the
still active use of beggars’ marks and mendicant hieroglyphs. One
gentleman writes from Great Yarmouth to say that, whilst residing in
Norwich, he used frequently to see them on the houses and street corners
in the suburbs. Another gentleman, a clergyman, states that he has so
far made himself acquainted with the meanings of the signs employed,
that by himself marking the characters ◻ (gammy) and ⦿ (flummuxed) on
the gate-posts of his parsonage, he enjoys a singular immunity from
alms-seekers and cadgers on the tramp. This hint may not be lost on many
other sufferers from importunate beggars, yet its publication may lead
to the introduction of a new code.

       *       *       *       *       *

In a popular constable’s guide,[31] giving the practice of justices in
petty sessions, the following interesting paragraph is found,
corroborating what has just been said on the hieroglyphs used by
vagabonds:—

    “Gipsies follow their brethren by numerous marks, such as strewing
    handfuls of grass in the daytime at a four lane or cross roads; the
    grass being strewn down the road the gang have taken; also, by a
    cross being made on the ground with a stick or knife—the longest
    end of the cross denotes the route taken. In the night-time a cleft
    stick is placed in the fence at the cross roads, with an arm
    pointing down the road their comrades have taken. The marks are
    always placed on the left-hand side, so that the stragglers can
    easily and readily find them.”

From the cleft stick here alluded to, we learn the origin and use of ⊃—,
the third hieroglyph in the vagabond’s private list. And the extract
also proves that the “rule of the road” is the same with tramps as with
that body which is morally less but physically more dangerous, the
London drivers.


FOOTNOTES:

[24] Mr. Rawlinson’s _Report to the General Board of Health, Parish of
Havant, Hampshire_.

[25] Vol. v. p. 210.

[26] Vol. i. pp. 218 and 247.

[27] See Dictionary.

[28] Sometimes, as appears from the following, the names of persons and
houses are written instead. “In almost every one of the padding-kens, or
low lodging-houses in the country, there is a list of walks pasted up
over the kitchen mantelpiece. Now at St. Albans, for instance, at the
----, and at other places, there is a paper stuck up in each of the
kitchens. This paper is headed, ‘Walks out of this town’ and underneath
it is set down the names of the villages in the neighbourhood at which a
beggar may call when out on his walk, and they are so arranged as to
allow the cadger to make a round of about six miles each day, and return
the same night. In many of these papers there are sometimes twenty walks
set down. No villages that are in any way ‘gammy’ [bad] are ever
mentioned in these papers, and the cadger, if he feels inclined to stop
for a few days in the town, will be told by the lodging-house keeper, or
the other cadgers that he may meet there, what gentlemen’s seats or
private houses are of any account on the walk that he means to take. The
names of the good houses are not set down in the paper, for fear of the
police.”—_Mayhew_, vol. i. p. 418. [This business is also much altered
in consequence of the increase in the surveillance of the kens, an
increase which, though nominally for sanitary purposes, has a strong
moral effect. Besides this, Mr. Mayhew’s informants seem to have
possessed a fair share of that romance which is inherent among
vagabonds.—ED.]

[29] See Dictionary.

[30] Mr. Rawlinson’s _Report to the General Board of Health, Parish of
Havant, Hampshire_.

[31] Snowden’s _Magistrate’s Assistant_, 1852, p. 444.




A SHORT HISTORY OF SLANG,

OR

THE VULGAR LANGUAGE OF FAST LIFE.

Slang is the language of street humour, of fast, high, and low life.
Cant, as was stated in the chapter upon that subject, is the vulgar
language of secrecy. It must be admitted, however, that within the past
few years they have become almost indivisible. They are both universal
and ancient, and appear to have been, with certain exceptions, the
offspring of gay, vulgar, or worthless persons in every part of the
world at every period of time. Indeed, if we are to believe implicitly
the saying of the wise man, that “there is nothing new under the sun,”
the “bloods” of buried Nineveh, with their knotty and door-matty-looking
beards, may have cracked Slang jokes on the steps of Sennacherib’s
palace; while the stocks and stones of ancient Egypt, and the bricks of
venerable and used-up Babylon, may be covered with Slang hieroglyphs,
which, being perfectly unknown to modern antiquaries, have long been
stumbling-blocks to the philologist; so impossible is it at this day to
say what was then authorized, or what vulgar, language. The only
objection that can be raised to this idea is, that Slang was, so far as
can be discovered, traditional, and unwritten, until the appearance of
this volume, a state of things which accounts for its many changes, and
the doubtful orthography of even its best known and most permanent
forms. Slang is almost as old as speech, and must date from the
congregating together of people in cities. It is the result of crowding,
and excitement, and artificial life. We have traces of this as far as we
can refer back. Martial, the epigrammatist, is full of Slang. When an
uninvited guest accompanied his friend, the Slang of the day styled him
his “umbra;” when a man was trussed, neck and heels, it called him
jocosely “quadrupus.” Slang is nowadays very often the only vehicle by
which rodomontade may be avoided. It is often full of the most pungent
satire, and is always to the point. Without point Slang has no _raison
d’être_.

Old English Slang was coarser, and depended more upon downright
vulgarity than our modern Slang. It was a jesting speech, or humorous
indulgence for the thoughtless moment or the drunken hour, and it acted
as a vent-peg for a fit of temper or irritability; but it did not
interlard and permeate every description of conversation as now. It was
confined to nicknames and improper subjects, and encroached but to a
very small extent upon the domain of authorized speech. Indeed, it was
exceedingly limited when compared with the vast territory of Slang in
such general favour and complete circulation at the present day. Still,
although not an extensive institution, as in our time, Slang certainly
did exist in this country centuries ago, as we may see if we look down
the page of any respectable History of England. Cromwell was familiarly
called “Old Noll,”—in much the same way as Bonaparte was termed
“Boney,” and Wellington “Conkey” or “Nosey,” only a few years ago.[32]
His Legislature, too, was spoken of in a high-flavoured way as the
“Barebones” or “Rump” Parliament, and his followers were nicknamed
“Roundheads,” and the peculiar religious sects of his protectorate were
styled “Puritans” and “Quakers.”[33] The Civil War pamphlets, and the
satirical hits of the Cavaliers and the Commonwealth men, originated
numerous Slang words and vulgar similes in full use at the present
moment. Here is a field of inquiry for the Philological Society, indeed
a territory, for there are thirty thousand of these partisan tracts.
Later still, in the court of Charles II., the naughty ladies and the gay
lords, with Rochester at their head, talked Slang; and very naughty
Slang it was too. Fops in those days, when “over head and ears” in debt,
and in continual fear of arrest, termed their enemies, the bailiffs,
“Philistines”[34] or “Moabites.” At a later period, when collars were
worn detached from shirts, in order to save the expense of washing—an
object, it would seem, with needy “swells” in all ages—they obtained
the name of “Jacobites.” One-half of the coarse wit in Butler’s
_Hudibras_ lurks in the vulgar words and phrases which he was so fond of
employing. These Slang phrases contained the marrow of his arguments
stripped of all superfluous matter, and they fell with ponderous weight
and terrible effect upon his opponents. They were more homely and
forcible than the mild and elegant sentences of Cowley, and the people,
therefore, hurrahed them, and pronounced Butler one of themselves,—or,
as we should say, in a joyful moment, “a jolly good fellow.” Orator
Henley preached and prayed in Slang, and first charmed and then ruled
the dirty mobs in Lincoln’s Inn Fields by vulgarisms. Burly Grose
mentions Henley, with the remark that we owe a great many Slang phrases
to him, though even the worst Slang was refinement itself compared with
many of Henley’s most studied oratorical utterances, which proves that
the most blackguard parts of a blackguard speech may be perfectly free
from either Slang or Cant. Swift, and old Sir Roger L’Estrange, and
Arbuthnot, were all fond of vulgar or Slang language; indeed, we may see
from a Slang word used by the latter how curious is the gradual adoption
of vulgar terms in our standard dictionaries. The worthy doctor, in
order to annihilate (or, as we should say, with a fitting respect to the
subject under consideration, to “smash”) an opponent, thought proper on
an occasion to use the word “cabbage,” not in the ancient sense of a
flatulent vegetable of the kitchen-garden, but in the at once Slang
sense of purloining or cribbing. Johnson soon met with the word, looked
at it, examined it, weighed it, and shook his head, but out of respect
to a brother doctor inserted it in his dictionary, labelling it,
however, prominently “Cant;” whilst Walker and Webster, years after,
when all over England “to cabbage” was to pilfer, placed the term in
their dictionaries as an ancient and very respectable word. Another
Slang term, “gull,” to cheat, or delude, sometimes varied to “gully,” is
stated to be connected with the Dean of St. Patrick’s. “Gull,” a dupe,
or a fool, is often used by our old dramatists, and is generally
believed to have given rise to the verb; but a curious little edition of
_Bamfylde Moore Carew_, published in 1827, says that “to gull,” or
“gully,” is derived from the well-known Gulliver, the hero of the famous
Travels. It may be from the phrase, “You can’t come Gulliver over me,”
in use while the popularity of the book was hot. How crammed with Slang
are the dramatic works of the last century! The writers of the comedies
and farces in those days must have lived in the streets, and written
their plays in the public-houses, so filled are they with vulgarisms and
unauthorized words. The popular phrases, “I owe you one,” “That’s one
for his nob,” and “Keep moving, dad,” arose in this way.[35] The second
of these sayings was, doubtless, taken from the card-table, for at
cribbage the player who holds the knave of the suit turned up counts
“one for his nob,” and the dealer who turns up a knave counts “two for
his heels.” From a dramatic point of view, the use of these phrases is
perfectly correct, as they were in constant use among the people
supposed to be represented by the author’s characters.

In Mrs. Centlivre’s admirable comedy of _A Bold Stroke for a Wife_, we
see the origin of that popular phrase, the real Simon Pure. Simon Pure
is the Quaker name adopted by Colonel Feignwell as a trick to obtain the
hand of Mistress Anne Lovely in marriage. The veritable Quaker, the
“real Simon Pure,” recommended by Aminadab Holdfast, of Bristol, as a
fit sojourner with Obadiah Prim, arrives at last, to the discomfiture of
the Colonel, who, to maintain his position and gain time, concocts a
letter in which the real Quaker is spoken of as a housebreaker who had
travelled in the “leather conveniency” from Bristol, and adopted the
garb and name of the western Quaker in order to pass off as the “Real
Simon Pure,” but only for the purpose of robbing the house and cutting
the throat of the perplexed Obadiah. The scene in which the two Simon
Pures, the real and the counterfeit, meet, is one of the best in the
comedy.

Tom Brown, of “facetious memory,” as his friends were wont to say, and
Ned Ward, who wrote humorous books, and when tired drew beer for his
customers at his alehouse in Long Acre,[36] were both great producers of
Slang in the last century, and to them we owe many popular current
phrases and household words.

Written Slang was checked, rather than advanced, by the pens of
Addison, Johnson, and Goldsmith; although Bee, the bottle-holder and
historiographer of the pugilistic band of brothers in the youthful days
of flat-nosed Tom Cribb, has gravely stated that Johnson, when young and
rakish, contributed to an early volume of the _Gentleman’s Magazine_ a
few pages, by way of specimen, of a slang dictionary, the result, Mr.
Bee says, “of his midnight ramblings!”[37] This statement is not only
improbable, but an investigation of the venerable magazine, though
strict and searching, produces no evidence in corroboration of Mr. Bee.
Goldsmith, even, certainly coined a few words as occasion required,
although as a rule his pen was pure and graceful, and adverse to
neologisms. The word “fudge,” it has been stated, was first used by him
in literary composition, although it probably originated with one
Captain Fudge, a notorious fibber, nearly a century before. Street
phrases, nicknames, and vulgar words were continually being added
to the great stock of popular Slang up to the commencement of
the present century, when it received numerous additions from pugilism,
horse-racing, and “fast” life generally, which suddenly came into great
public favour, and was at its height in the latter part of the reign of
George III., and in the early days of the Regency. Slang in those days
was generally termed “flash” language. It will thus be noted that the
term “flash” has in turn represented both Cant and Slang; now the word
Slang has become perfectly generic. So popular was “flash” with the
“bloods” of high life, that it constituted the best paying literary
capital for certain authors and dramatists. Pierce Egan issued
_Boxiana_, and _Life in London_, six portly octavo volumes, crammed with
Slang; and Moncrieff wrote the most popular farce of the day, _Tom and
Jerry_ (adapted from the latter work), which, to use newspaper Slang,
“took the town by storm,” and, with its then fashionable vulgarisms,
made the fortune of the old Adelphi Theatre, and was without exception
the most wonderful instance of a continuous theatrical run in ancient or
modern times. This also was brimful of Slang. Other authors helped to
popularize and extend Slang down to our own time, and it has now taken a
somewhat different turn, dropping many of the Cant and old vulgar words,
and assuming a certain quaint and fashionable phraseology—familiar,
utilitarian, and jovial. There can be no doubt that common speech is
greatly influenced by fashion, fresh manners, and that general change of
ideas which steals over a people once in a generation. But before
proceeding further into the region of Slang, it will be well to say
something on the etymology of the word.

The word Slang is only mentioned by two lexicographers—Webster and
Ogilvie.[38] Johnson, Walker, and the older compilers of dictionaries
give “slang” as the preterite of “sling,” but not a word about Slang in
the sense of low, vulgar, or unrecognised language. The origin of the
word has often been asked for in literary journals and books, but only
one man, until recently, ever hazarded an etymology—Jonathan Bee.[39]
With a recklessness peculiar to ignorance, Bee stated that Slang was
derived from “the _slangs_ or fetters worn by prisoners, having acquired
that name from the manner in which they were worn, as they required a
sling of string to keep them off the ground.” Bee had just been nettled
at Pierce Egan’s producing a new edition of Grose’s _Dictionary of the
Vulgar Tongue_, and was determined to excel in a vulgar dictionary of
his own, which should be more racy, more pugilistic, and more original.
How far he succeeded in this latter particular, his ridiculous etymology
of Slang will show. Slang is not an English word; it is the Gipsy term
for their secret language, and its synonym is Gibberish—another word
which was believed to have had no distinct origin.[40] Grose—stout and
burly Captain Grose—whom we may characterize as the greatest antiquary,
joker, and porter-drinker of his day, was the first lexicographer to
recognise the word “Slang.” It occurs in his _Classical Dictionary of
the Vulgar Tongue_, of 1785, with the statement that it implies “Cant or
vulgar language.” Grose was a great favourite with Burns, and so pleased
him by his extensive powers of story-telling and grog-imbibing, that the
companionable and humour-loving Scotch bard wrote for his fat
friend—or, to use his own words, “the fine, fat, fodgel wight”—the
immortal poem of _Tam O’ Shanter_.

It is not worth while troubling the reader with a long account of the
transformation into an English term of the word Slang, as it is easily
seen how we obtained it. Hucksters and beggars on tramp, or at fairs and
races, associate and frequently join in any rough enterprise with the
Gipsies. The word would be continually heard by them, and would in this
manner soon become part of their vocabulary,[41] and, when carried by
“fast” or vulgar fashionables from the society of thieves and low
characters to their own drawing-rooms, would as quickly become Slang,
and the representative term for all vulgar language. Modern philologists
give the word Slang as derived from the French _langue_. This is, at all
events, as likely as any other derivative.

Any sudden excitement or peculiar circumstance is quite sufficient to
originate and set going a score of Slang words. Nearly every election or
public agitation throws out offshoots of excitement, or scintillations
of humour in the shape of Slang terms—vulgar at first, but at length
adopted, if possessing sufficient hold on the public mind, as
semi-respectable from sheer force of habit. There is scarcely a
condition or calling in life that does not possess its own peculiar
Slang. The professions, legal and medical, have each familiar and
unauthorized terms for peculiar circumstances and things, and it is
quite certain that the clerical calling, or “the cloth”—in itself a
Slang term given at a time when the laity were more distinguished by
their gay dress from the clergy than they are now—is not entirely free
from this peculiarity. Every workshop, warehouse, factory, and mill
throughout the country has its Slang, and so have the public schools and
the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge. Sea Slang constitutes the
principal charm of a sailor’s “yarn;” and our soldiers have in turn
their peculiar nicknames and terms for things and subjects, proper and
improper. A writer in _Household Words_ (No. 183) has gone so far as to
remark, that a person “shall not read one single parliamentary debate,
as reported in a first-class newspaper, without meeting scores of Slang
words,” and “that from Mr. Speaker in his chair, to the Cabinet
Ministers whispering behind it—from mover to seconder, from true blue
Protectionist to extremest Radical—Mr. Barry’s New House echoes and
re-echoes with Slang.” This statement is most worthy of notice, as
showing how, with a very small sub-stratum of fact, a plausible, though
not the less gigantic, mis-statement may be built up.

The universality of Slang is extraordinary. Let any person for a short
time narrowly examine the conversation of his dearest and nearest
friends, or even analyse his own supposed correct talk, and he shall be
amazed at the numerous unauthorized, and what we can only call vulgar,
words in constant use. One peculiarity of the growth of Slang is the
finding of new meanings for old words. Take, for instance, the verbs
“do,” “cut,” “go,” and “take,” and see how they are used to express
fresh ideas, and then let us ask ourselves how is it possible for a
Frenchman or German, be he never so well educated, to avoid continually
blundering and floundering amongst our little words when trying to make
himself understood in an ordinary conversation? He may have studied our
language the required time, and have gone through the usual amount of
“grinding,” and practised the common allotment of patience, but all to
no purpose as far as accuracy is concerned. As, however, we do not make
our language, nor for the matter of that our Slang, for the convenience
or inconvenience of foreigners, we need not pursue this portion of the
subject further. “Jabber” and “hoax” were Slang and Cant terms in
Swift’s time; so, indeed, were “mob” and “sham.”[42] Words directly from
the Latin and Greek, framed in accordance with the rules which govern
the construction of the language, are not Slang, but are good English,
if not Saxon,—a term, by the way, which is as much misused as any
unfortunate word that can be remembered just now. Sound contributes many
Slang words—a source that etymologists frequently overlook. Nothing
pleases an ignorant person so much as a high-sounding term, “full of
fury.” How melodious and drum-like are those vulgar coruscations
“rumbumptious,” “slantingdicular,” “splendiferous,” “rumbustious,” and
“ferricadouzer.” What a “pull” the sharp-nosed lodging-house-keeper
thinks she has over her victims if she can but hurl such testimonies of
a liberal education at them when they are disputing her charges, and
threatening to “absquatulate!” In the United States the vulgar-genteel
even excel the poor “stuck-up” Cockneys in their formation of a native
fashionable language. How charming to a refined ear are “abskize,”
“catawampously,” “exflunctify,” “obscute,” “keslosh,” “kesouse,”
“keswollop,” and “kewhollux!”[43] It must not be forgotten, however,
that a great many new “Americanisms” are perfectly unknown in America,
and in this respect they resemble the manners and customs of our cousins
as found in books, and in books only. Vulgar words representing action
and brisk movement often owe their origin to sound, as has before been
remarked. Mispronunciation, too, is another great source of vulgar or
Slang words, and of this “ramshackle,” “shackly,” “nary-one” for neither
or neither one, “ottomy” or “atomy” for anatomy, “rench” for rinse, are
specimens. The commonalty dislike frequently-occurring words difficult
of pronunciation, and so we have the street abridgments of “bimeby” for
by-and-by, “caze” for because, “gin” for given, “hankercher” for
handkerchief, “ruma tiz” for rheumatism, “backer” for tobacco, and many
others, not perhaps Slang, but certainly, all vulgarisms. Whately, in
his _Remains of Bishop Copleston_, has inserted a leaf from the bishop’s
note-book on the popular corruption of names, mentioning, among others,
“kickshaws,” as from the French _quelques choses_; “beefeater,” the
grotesque guardian of royalty in a procession, and the envied devourer
of enormous beefsteaks, as but a vulgar pronunciation of the French
_buffetier_, and “George and Cannon,” the sign of a public-house, as
nothing but a corruption (although so soon!) of the popular premier of
the last generation, George Canning.[44] Literature has its Slang terms;
and the desire on the part of writers to say funny and startling things
in a novel and curious way contributes many unauthorized words to the
great stock of Slang.

Fashionable or Upper-class Slang is of several varieties. There is the
Belgravian, military and naval, parliamentary, dandy, and the reunion
and visiting Slang. English officers, civilians, and their families,
who have resided long in India, have contributed many terms from the
Hindostanee to our language. Several of these, such as “chit,” a letter,
and “tiffin,” lunch, are fast losing their Slang character, and becoming
regularly-recognised English words. “Jungle,” as a term for a forest or
wilderness, is now an English phrase; a few years past, however, it was
merely the Hindostanee “junkul.” This, being a perfectly legal
transition, having no other recognised form, can hardly be characterized
as Slang. The extension of trade in China, and the English settlement of
Hong Kong, have introduced among us several examples of Canton jargon,
that exceedingly curious Anglo-Chinese dialect spoken in the seaports of
the Celestial Empire. While these words have been carried as it were
into the families of the upper and middle classes, persons in a humbler
rank of life, through the sailors and soldiers and Lascar and Chinese
beggars that haunt the metropolis, have also adopted many Anglo-Indian
and Anglo-Chinese phrases. As this dictionary would have been incomplete
without them, they are carefully recorded in its pages. Concerning the
Slang of the fashionable world, it has been remarked that it is mostly
imported from France; and that an unmeaning gibberish of Gallicisms runs
through English fashionable conversation and fashionable novels, and
accounts of fashionable parties in the fashionable newspapers. Yet,
ludicrously enough, immediately the fashionable magnates of England
seize on any French idiom, the French themselves not only universally
abandon it to us, but positively repudiate it altogether from their
idiomatic vocabulary. If you were to tell a well-bred Frenchman that
such and such an aristocratic marriage was on the _tapis_, he would
stare with astonishment, and look down on the carpet in the startled
endeavour to find a marriage in so unusual a place. If you were to talk
to him of the _beau monde_, he would imagine you meant the world which
God made, not half-a-dozen streets and squares between Hyde Park Corner
and Chelsea Bun House. The _thé dansant_ would be completely
inexplicable to him. If you were to point out to him the Dowager Lady
Grimgriffin acting as _chaperon_ to Lady Amanda Creamville, he would
imagine you were referring to the _petit Chaperon rouge_—to little
Red-Riding Hood. He might just understand what was meant by _vis-à-vis_,
_entremets_, and some others of the flying horde of frivolous little
foreign slangisms hovering about fashionable cookery and fashionable
furniture; but three-fourths of them would seem to him as barbarous
French provincialisms, or, at best, but as antiquated and obsolete
expressions, picked out of the letters of Mademoiselle Scuderi, or the
tales of Crebillon “the younger.” Servants, too, appropriate the scraps
of French conversation which fall from their masters’ guests at the
dinner table, and forthwith in the world of flunkeydom the word “know”
is disused, and the lady’s-maid, in doubt on a particular point, asks
John whether or no he “saveys” it?[45] What, too, can be more abominable
than that heartless piece of fashionable newspaper Slang, regularly
employed when speaking of the successful courtship of young people in
the aristocratic world:—

    MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE.—We understand that a marriage is ARRANGED (!)
    betwixt the Lady, &c. &c., and the Honourable, &c. &c.

“Arranged!” Is that cold-blooded Smithfield or Mark Lane term for a sale
or a purchase the proper word to express the hopeful, joyous, golden
union of young and trustful hearts? Possibly, though, the word is often
used with a due regard to facts, for marriages, especially amongst our
upper classes, are not always “made in heaven.” Which is the proper way
to pronounce the names of great people, and what the correct authority?
Lord Cowper, we are often assured, is Lord _Cooper_—on this principle
Lord Cowley would certainly be Lord _Cooley_—and Mr. Carew, we are
told, should be Mr. _Carey_, Ponsonby should be _Punsunby_, Eyre should
be _Aire_, Cholmondeley should be _Chumley_, St. John _Sinjen_,
Beauchamp should be _Beachem_, Majoribanks _Marshbanks_, and Powell
should always be _Poel_. The pronunciation of proper names has long been
an anomaly in the conversation of the upper classes of this country.
Hodge and Podge, the clodhoppers of Shakspeare’s time, talked in their
mug-houses of the great Lords _Darbie_, _Barkelie_, and _Bartie_. In
Pall Mall and May Fair these personages are spoken of in exactly the
same manner at the present day, whilst in the City, and amongst the
_middle_ classes, we only hear of Derby, Berkeley, &c.,—the correct
pronunciations, if the spelling is worth aught. It must not be
forgotten, however, that the pronunciation of the upper classes, as
regards the names of places just mentioned, is a relic of old times when
the orthography was different. The middle-class man is satisfied to take
matters the modern way, but even he, when he wishes to be thought a
swell, alters his style. In fact, the old rule as to proper names being
pronounced according to individual taste, is, and ever will be, of
absolute necessity, not only as regards the upper and middle, but the
lower classes. A costermonger is ignorant of such a place as Birmingham,
but understands you in a moment if you talk of _Brummagem_. Why do not
Pall Mall exquisites join with the costermongers in this pronunciation?
It is the ancient one.[46]

_Parliamentary Slang_, excepting a few peculiar terms connected with
“_the_ House” (scarcely Slang), is mainly composed of fashionable,
literary, and learned Slang. When members get excited, and wish to be
forcible, they are now and again, but not very often, found guilty of
vulgarisms, and then may be not particular which of the street terms
they select, providing it carries, as good old Dr. South said, plenty of
“wildfire” in it. Lord Cairns when Sir Hugh, and a member of the Lower
House, spoke of “that homely but expressive phrase, ‘dodge.’” Out of
“the House,” several Slang terms are used in connexion with Parliament
or members of Parliament. If Lord Palmerston was familiar by name to the
tribes of the Caucasus and Asia Minor as a great foreign diplomatist,
when the name of our Queen was unknown to the inhabitants of those
parts—as was once stated in the _Times_—it is worthy of remark that,
amongst the costers and the wild inhabitants of the streets, he was at
that time better known as “Pam.” The cabmen on the “ranks” in Piccadilly
have been often heard to call each other’s attention to the great
leader of the Opposition in the following expressive manner—“Hollo,
there! de yer see old ‘Dizzy’ doing a stump?” A “plumper” is a single
vote at an election—not a “split-ticket;” and electors who had occupied
a house, no matter how small, and boiled a pot in it, thus qualifying
themselves for voting, used in the good old days to be termed
“potwallopers.” A quiet “walk over” is a re-election without opposition
and much cost; and is obtained from the sporting vocabulary, in which
the term is not Slang. A “caucus” meeting refers to the private
assembling of politicians before an election, when candidates are
chosen, and measures of action agreed upon. The term comes from America,
where caucus means a meeting simply. A “job,” in political phraseology,
is a Government office or contract obtained by secret influence or
favouritism; and is not a whit more objectionable in sound than is the
nefarious proceeding offensive to the sense of those who pay but do not
participate. The _Times_ once spoke of “the patriotic member of
Parliament ‘potted out’ in a dusty little lodging somewhere about Bury
Street.” But then the _Times_ was not always the mildly respectable
high-class paper it now is, as a reference to the columns devoted by it
to Macaulay’s official career will alone determine. These, which
appeared during the present reign, would be far below the lowest
journalistic taste nowadays; yet they are in keeping with the rest of
the political references made at that time by the now austere and
high-principled “leading journal.” The term “quockerwodger,” although
referring to a wooden toy figure which jerks its limbs about when pulled
by a string, has been supplemented with a political meaning. A
pseudo-politician, whose strings of action are pulled by somebody else,
is often termed a “quockerwodger.” From an early period politics and
partyism have attracted unto themselves quaint Slang terms. Horace
Walpole quotes a party nickname of February, 1742, as a Slang word of
the day:—“The Tories declare against any further prosecution, if Tories
there are, for now one hears of nothing but the ‘broad-bottom;’ it is
the reigning Cant word, and means the taking all parties and people,
indifferently, into the Ministry.” Thus “broad-bottom” in those days was
Slang for “coalition.” The term “rat,” too, in allusion to rats
deserting vessels about to sink, has long been employed towards those
turncoat politicians who change their party for interest. Who that
occasionally passes near the Houses of Parliament has not often noticed
stout or careful M.P.’s walk briskly through the Hall, and on the
kerb-stone in front, with umbrella or walking-cane uplifted, shout to
the cabmen on the rank, “Four-wheeler!” The term is both useful and
expressive; but it is none the less Slang, though of a better kind than
“growler,” used to denominate the same kind of vehicle, or “shoful,” the
street term for a hansom cab.

Military Slang is on a par, and of a character, with dandy Slang.
Inconvenient friends, or elderly and lecturing relatives, are pronounced
“dreadful bores.” This affectionate term, like most other Slang phrases
which have their rise in a certain section of society, has spread and
become of general application. Four-wheeled cabs are called “bounders;”
and a member of the Four-in-hand Club, driving to Epsom on the Derby
Day, would, using fashionable phraseology, speak of it as “tooling his
drag down to the Derby.” A vehicle, if not a “drag” (or dwag), is a
“trap,” or a “cask;” and if the “turn-out” happens to be in other than a
trim condition, it is pronounced at once as not “down the road,” unless
the critic should prefer to characterize the equipage as “dickey.” Your
City swell would say it is not “up to the mark;” whilst the costermonger
would call it a “wery snide affair.” In the army a barrack or military
station is known as a “lobster-box;” to “cram” for an examination is to
“mug-up” (this same term is much in vogue among actors, who regard
mugging-up as one of the fine arts of the profession); to reject from
the examination is to “spin;” and that part of the barrack occupied by
subalterns is frequently spoken of as the “rookery.” In dandy or swell
Slang, any celebrity, from the Poet-Laureate to the Pope of Rome, is a
“swell,”—“the old swell” now occupies the place once held by the
“guv’nor.” Wrinkled-faced old professors, who hold dress and fashionable
tailors in abhorrence, are called “awful swells,”—if they happen to be
very learned or clever. In this upper-class Slang, a title is termed a
“handle;” trousers, “inexpressibles,” and bags, or “howling bags,” when
of a large pattern;—a superior appearance, or anything above the common
cut, is styled “extensive;” a four-wheeled cab is called a “birdcage;” a
dance, a “hop;” dining at another man’s table, “sitting under his
mahogany;” anything flashy or showy, “loud;” the peculiar make or cut of
a coat, its “build;” full dress, “full fig;” wearing clothes which
represent the very extreme of fashion, “dressing to death;” a dinner or
supper party, a “spread;” a friend (or a “good fellow”), a “trump;” a
difficulty, a “screw loose;” and everything that is unpleasant, “from
bad sherry to a writ from a tailor,” “jeuced infernal.” The phrase, “to
send a man to Coventry,” or permit no person “in the set” to speak to
him, although an ancient saying, must still be considered Slang.

The Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, and the great public schools,
are the hotbeds of fashionable Slang. Growing boys and high-spirited
young fellows detest restraint of all kinds, and prefer making a dash at
life in a Slang phraseology of their own to all the set forms and
syntactical rules of _Alma Mater_. Many of the most expressive words in
a common chit-chat, or free-and-easy conversation, are old university
vulgarisms. “Cut,” in the sense of dropping an acquaintance, was
originally a Cambridge form of speech; and “hoax,” to deceive or
ridicule, we are informed by Grose, was many years since an Oxford term.
Among the words that fast society has borrowed from our great
scholastic—not establishments (they are sacred to linendrapery and
“gentlemanly assistants”)—institutions, is found “crib,” a house or
apartments; “dead men,” empty wine bottles; “drawing teeth,”[47]
wrenching off knockers,—an obsolete amusement; “fizzing,” first-rate,
or splendid; “governor,” or “relieving-officer,” the general term for a
male parent; “plucked,” defeated or turned back, now altered to
“plough;” “quiz,” to scrutinize, or a prying old fellow; and “row,” a
noisy disturbance. The Slang words in use at Oxford and Cambridge would
alone fill a volume. As examples let us take “scout,” which at Oxford
refers to an undergraduate’s valet, whilst the same menial at Cambridge
is termed a “gyp,”—popularly derived by the Cantabs from the Greek,
γὺψ, a vulture; “skull,” the head, or master, of a college; “battles,”
the Oxford term for rations, changed at Cambridge into “commons.” The
term “dickey,” a half-shirt, it is said, originated with the students of
Trinity College, Dublin, who at first styled it a “tommy,” from the
Greek τομὴ, a section,—the change from “tommy” to “dickey” requires no
explanation. “Crib,” a literal translation, is now universal; “grind”
refers to “working up” for an examination, also to a walk or
“constitutional;” “Hivite” is a student of St. Begh’s (St. Bee’s)
College, Cumberland; to “japan,” in this Slang speech, is to ordain;
“mortar board” is a square college cap; “sim,” a student of a
Methodistical turn—in allusion to the Rev. Charles Simeon; “sloggers,”
at Cambridge, refers to the second division of race-boats, known at
Oxford as “torpids;” “sport” is to show or exhibit; “trotter” is the
jocose term for a tailor’s man who goes round for orders; and “tufts”
are privileged students who dine with the “dons,” and are distinguished
by golden tufts, or tassels, in their caps. Hence we get the world-wide
Slang term “tuft-hunter,” one whose pride it is to be acquainted with
scions of the nobility—a sycophantic race unfortunately not confined
to any particular place or climate, nor peculiar to any age or either
sex. There are many terms in use at Oxford not known at Cambridge; and
such Slang names as “coach,” “gulf,” “harry-soph,” “poker,” or
“post-mortem,” common enough at Cambridge, are seldom or never heard
at the great sister University. For numerous other examples of college
Slang the reader is referred to the Dictionary.

Religious Slang, strange as the compound may appear, exists with other
descriptions of vulgar speech at the present day. _Punch_, in one of
those half-humorous, half-serious articles, once so characteristic of
the wits engaged on that paper, who were, as a rule, fond of lecturing
any national abuse or popular folly, remarked—“Slang has long since
penetrated into the Forum, and now we meet it in the Senate, and even
the pulpit itself is no longer free from its intrusion.” There is no
wish here, for one moment, to infer that the practice is general. On the
contrary, and in justice to the clergy, it must be said that the
principal disseminators of pure English throughout the country are the
ministers of our Established Church. Yet it cannot be denied that a
great deal of Slang phraseology and expressive vulgarism have gradually
crept into the very pulpits which should give forth as pure speech as
doctrine. This is an error which, however, has only to be noticed, to be
cured.

Dean Conybeare, in his able “Essay on Church Parties,”[48] has noticed
this addition of Slang to our pulpit speech. As stated in his Essay, the
practice appears to confine itself mainly to the exaggerated forms of
the High and Low Church—the Tractarians and the “Recordites.”[49] By
way of illustration, the Dean cites the evening parties, or social
meetings, common amongst the wealthier lay members of the Recordite
churches, where the principal topics discussed—one or more favourite
clergymen being present in a quasi-official manner—are “the merits and
demerits of different preachers, the approaching restoration of the
Jews, the date of the Millennium, the progress of the ‘Tractarian
heresy,’ and the anticipated ‘perversion’ of High Church neighbours.”
These subjects are canvassed in a dialect differing considerably from
English, as the word is generally understood. The terms “faithful,”
“tainted,” “acceptable,” “decided,” “legal,” and many others,
are used in a sense different from that given to any of them by the
lexicographers. We hear that Mr. A. has been more “owned” than Mr. B.;
and that Mr. C. has more “seals”[50] than Mr. D. Again, the word
“gracious” is invested with a meaning as extensive as that attached by
young ladies to nice. Thus, we hear of a “gracious sermon,” a “gracious
meeting,” a “gracious child,” and even a “gracious whipping.” The word
“dark” has also a new and peculiar usage. It is applied to every person,
book, or place not impregnated with Recordite principles. A ludicrous
misunderstanding resulting from this phraseology is on record (this is
not a joke). “What did you mean,” said A. to B., “by telling me that
---- was such a very ‘dark’ village? I rode over there to-day, and found
the street particularly broad and cheerful, and there is not a tree in
the place.” “The gospel is not preached there,” was B’s. laconic reply.
The conclusion of one of these singular evening parties is generally
marked by an “exposition”—an unseasonable sermon of nearly one hour’s
duration, circumscribed by no text, and delivered from the table by one
of the clerical visitors with a view to “improve the occasion.” This
same term, “improve the occasion,” is of Slang slangy, and is so mouthed
by Stigginses and Chadbands, and their followers, that it has become
peculiarly objectionable to persons of broad views. In the Essay to
which reference has been made, the religious Slang terms for the two
great divisions of the Established Church receive some explanation. The
old-fashioned High Church party—rich and “stagnant,” noted for its
“sluggish mediocrity, hatred of zeal, dread of innovation, abuse of
Dissent, blundering and languid utterance”—is called the “high and
dry;” whilst the opposing division, known as the Low Church—equally
stagnant with the former, but poorer, and more lazily inclined (from
absence of education) towards Dissent—receives the nickname of the “low
and slow.” These terms are among persons learned in the distinctions
shortened, in ordinary conversation, to the “dry” and the “slow.” The
Broad Church, or moderate division, is often spoken of as the “broad
and shallow.”

What can be more objectionable than the irreverent and offensive manner
in which many Dissenting ministers continually pronounce the names of
the Deity—God and Lord? God, instead of pronouncing in the plain and
beautiful simple old English way, “G‑o‑d,” they drawl out into “Gorde”
or “Gaude;” and Lord, instead of speaking in the proper way, they
desecrate into “Loard” or “Loerd,”—lingering on the _u_, or the _r_, as
the case may be, until an honest hearer feels disgusted, and almost
inclined to run the gauntlet of beadles and deacons, and pull the vulgar
preacher from his pulpit. This is, though a Christian impulse, hardly in
accordance with our modern times and tolerant habits. Many young
preachers strive hard to acquire this peculiar pronunciation, in
imitation of the older ministers. What, then, can more properly be
called Slang, or, indeed, the most objectionable of Slang, than this
studious endeavour to pronounce the most sacred names in a uniformly
vulgar and unbecoming manner? If the old-fashioned preacher whistled
Cant through his nose, the modern vulgar reverend whines Slang from the
more natural organ. These vagaries of speech will, perhaps, by an
apologist, be termed “pulpit peculiarities,” and the writer may be
impugned for having dared to intermeddle with a subject that is or
should be removed from his criticisms. Honesty of purpose and evident
truthfulness of remark will, however, overcome the most virulent
opposition. The terms used by the mob towards the Church, however
illiberal and satirically vulgar, are fairly within the province of an
inquiry such as the present. A clergyman, in vulgar language, is spoken
of as a “choker,” a “cushion-thumper,” a “dominie,” an “earwig,” a
“gospel-grinder,” a “grey-coat parson;” a “spouter,” a “white-choker,”
or a “warming-pan rector,” if he only holds the living _pro tempore_. If
he is a lessee of the great tithes, “one in ten;” or if spoken of by an
Anglo-Indian, a “rook.” If a Tractarian, his outer garment is rudely
spoken of as a “pygostole,” or “M. B. (mark of the beast) coat.” His
profession is termed “the cloth” (this item of Slang has been already
referred to), and his practice is called “tub-thumping.” This latter
term has of late years been almost peculiarly confined to itinerant
preachers. Should he belong to the Dissenting body, he is probably
styled a “pantiler,” or a “psalm smiter,” or perhaps, a “swaddler.”[51]
His chapel, too, is spoken of as a “schism shop.” A Roman Catholic is
coarsely named a “brisket-beater.”

Particular as lawyers generally are about the meanings of words, they
have not prevented an unauthorized phraseology from arising, which may
be termed legal Slang. So forcibly did this truth impress a late writer,
that he wrote in a popular journal, “You may hear Slang every day in
term from barristers in their robes, at every mess-table, at every
bar-mess, at every college commons, and in every club dining-room.”
Swift, in his _Art of Polite Conversation_ (p. 15), published a century
and a half ago, states that “vardi” was the Slang in his time for
“verdict.” A few of the most common and well-known terms used out of
doors, with reference to legal matters, are “cook,” to hash or make up a
balance-sheet; “dipped,” mortgaged; “dun” (from a famous writ or
process-server named Dunn), to solicit payment; “fullied,” to be “fully
committed for trial;” “land shark,” a sailor’s definition of a lawyer;
“limb of the law,” a milder term for the same “professional;” “monkey
with a long tail,” a mortgage; “mouthpiece,” the thief’s term for his
counsel; “to run through the ring,” to take advantage of the Insolvency
Act; “smash,” to become bankrupt; “snipe,” an attorney with a long bill;
and “whitewash,” to take the benefit of the Insolvent Act. Comparatively
recent legislation has rendered many of these terms obsolete, and “in
liquidation” is now the most ominous sound a creditor can hear. Lawyers,
from their connexion with the police courts, and transactions with
persons in every grade of society, have ample opportunities for
acquiring street Slang, of which, in cross-questioning and wrangling,
they frequently avail themselves.

It has been said there exists a literary Slang, or the Slang of
Criticism—dramatic, artistic, and scientific. This is composed of such
words as “æsthetic,” “transcendental,” “the harmonies,” “the unities,” a
“myth;” such phrases as “an exquisite _morceau_ on the big drum,” a
“scholarlike rendering of John the Baptist’s great toe,” “keeping
harmony,” “middle distance,” “aërial perspective,” “delicate handling,”
“nervous chiaroscuro,” and the like. It is easy to find fault with this
system of doing work, whilst it is not easy to discover another at once
so easily understood by educated readers, and so satisfactory to artists
themselves. Discretion must, of course, always be used, in fact always
is used by the best writers, with regard to the quantity of technical
Slang an article will hold comfortably. Overdone mannerism is always a
mistake, and generally defeats its own end. Properly used, these
technicalities are allowable as the generous inflections and bendings of
a bountiful language, for the purpose of expressing fresh phases of
thought, and ideas not yet provided with representative words.[52]
_Punch_ often employs a Slang term to give point to a joke, or humour to
a line of satire. In his best day he gave an original etymology of the
schoolboy-ism “slog.” “Slog,” said the classical and then clever
_Punch_, is derived from the Greek word “slogo,” to baste, to wallop, to
slaughter. To show his partiality to the subject, he once amused his
readers with two columns on Slang and Sanscrit, from which the following
is taken:—

    “The allegory which pervades the conversation of all Eastern nations
    is the foundation of Western Slang; and the increased number of
    students of the Oriental languages, especially since Sanscrit and
    Arabic have been made subjects for the Indian Civil Service
    examinations, may have contributed to supply the English language
    with a large portion of its new dialect. While, however, the spirit
    of allegory comes from the East, there is so great a difference
    between the brevity of Western expression and the more cumbrous
    diction of the Oriental, that the origin of a phrase becomes
    difficult to trace. Thus, for instance, whilst the Turkish merchant
    might address his friend somewhat as follows—‘That which seems good
    to my father is to his servant as the perfumed breath of the west
    wind in the calm night of the Arabian summer;’ the Western
    negotiator observes more briefly, ‘all serene!’”[53]

But the vulgar term, “brick,” _Punch_ remarks in illustration,

    “must be allowed to be an exception, its Greek derivation being
    universally admitted, corresponding so exactly as it does in its
    rectangular form and compactness to the perfection of manhood,
    according to the views of Plato and Simonides; but any deviation
    from the simple expression, in which locality is indicated—as, for
    instance, ‘a genuine Bath’—decidedly breathes the Oriental spirit.”

It is singular that what _Punch_ says unwittingly and in humour
respecting the Slang expression “bosh,” should be quite true. “Bosh,”
remarks _Punch_, after speaking of it as belonging to the stock of words
pilfered from the Turks, “is one whose innate force and beauty the
slangographer is reluctantly compelled to admit. It is the only word
which seems a proper appellation for a great deal which we are obliged
to hear and to read every day of our life.” “Bosh,” nonsense or
stupidity, is derived from the Gipsy and the Persian. The universality
of Slang is proved by its continual use in the pages of _Punch_. Who
ever thinks, unless belonging to a past generation, of asking a friend
to explain the stray vulgar words employed by the _London Charivari_?
Some of the jokes, though, might nowadays be accompanied by explanatory
notes, in similar style to that adopted by youthful artists who write “a
man,” “a horse,” &c., when rather uncertain as to whether or not their
efforts will meet with due appreciation.

The _Athenæum_, the _Saturday Review_, and other kindred “weeklies,”
often indulge in Slang words when force of expression or a little humour
is desired, or when the various writers wish to say something which is
better said in Slang, or so-called vulgar speech, than in the authorized
language. Bartlett, the compiler of the _Dictionary of Americanisms_,
continually cites the _Athenæum_ as using Slang and vulgar expressions;
but the magazine the American refers to is not the literary journal of
the present day,—it was a smaller, and now defunct, “weekly.” The
present possessor of the classic title is, though, by no means
behindhand in its devotion to colloquialisms. Many other highly
respectable journals often use Slang words and phrases. The _Times_ (or,
in Slang, the “Thunderer”) frequently employs unauthorized terms; and,
following a “leader”[54] of the purest and most eloquent composition, may
sometimes be seen another “article”[54] on a totally different subject,
containing, perhaps, a score or more of exceedingly questionable words.
Among the words and phrases which may be included under the head of
Literary Slang are, “balaam,” matter kept constantly in type about
monstrous productions of nature, to fill up spaces in newspapers;
“balaam-box,” the term given in _Blackwood_ to the repository for
rejected articles; and “slate,” to pelt with abuse, or “cut up” in a
review. “He’s the fellow to slate a piece” is often said of dramatic
critics, especially of those who through youth, inexperience, and the
process of unnatural selection which causes them to be critics, imagine
that to abuse all that is above their comprehension is to properly
exercise the critical faculty. This is, however, dangerous ground. The
Slang names given to newspapers are curious;—thus, the _Morning
Advertiser_ is known as the “Tap-tub,” the “’Tizer,” and was until
recently the “Gin and Gospel Gazette.” The _Morning Post_ has obtained
the suggestive sobriquet of “Jeames;” whilst the _Morning Herald_ was
long caricatured as “Mrs. Harris,” and the _Standard_ as “Mrs.
Gamp.”[55]

The _Stage_, of course, has its Slang—“both before and behind the
curtain,” as a journalist remarks. The stage-manager is familiarly
termed “daddy;” and an actor by profession, or a “professional,” is
called a “pro.” It is amusing at times to hear a young actor—who struts
about padded with copies of all newspapers that have mentioned his
name—talking, in a mixed company, of the stage as _the_ profession.
This is after all but natural, for to him “all the world’s a stage.” A
man who is occasionally hired at a trifling remuneration to come upon
the stage as one of a crowd, or when a number of actors are wanted to
give effect, is named a “supe,”—an abbreviation of “supernumerary.” A
“surf” is a third-rate actor, who frequently pursues another calling;
and the band, or orchestra between the pit and the stage, is generally
spoken of as the “menagerie.” A “ben” is a benefit; and “sal” is the
Slang abbreviation of “salary.” Should no money be forthcoming on the
Saturday night, it is said that the “ghost doesn’t walk;” or else the
statement goes abroad that there is “no treasury,” as though the coffers
themselves had departed. The travelling or provincial theatricals, who
perform in any large room that can be rented in a country village, are
called “barn-stormers.” A “length” is forty-two lines of any dramatic
composition; and a “run” is the continuous term of a piece’s
performance. A “saddle” is the additional charge made by a manager to an
actor or actress upon his or her benefit night. To “mug up” is to paint
one’s face, or arrange the person, to represent a particular character;
to “corpse,” or to “stick,” is to balk, or put the other actors out in
their parts by forgetting yours. A performance is spoken of as either a
“gooser” or a “screamer,” should it be a failure or a great success;—if
the latter, it is not infrequently termed a “hit.” To “goose” a
performance is to hiss it; and continued “goosing” generally ends, or
did end before managers refused to accept the verdict of audiences, in
the play or the players being “damned.” To “star it” is to perform as
the centre of attraction, with your name in large type, and none but
subordinates and indifferent actors in the same performance. The
expressive term “clap-trap,” high-sounding nonsense, is nothing but an
ancient theatrical term, and signified a “trap” to catch a “clap” by way
of applause. “Up amongst the ‘gods,’” refers to being among the
spectators in the gallery,—termed in French Slang “paradis.”

There exists, too, in the great territory of vulgar speech what may not
inappropriately be termed Civic Slang. It consists of mercantile and
Stock Exchange terms, and the Slang of good living and wealth. A turkey
hung with sausages is facetiously styled an “alderman in chains,”—a
term which has spread from the City and become general; and a
half-crown, perhaps from its rotundity, is often termed an “alderman.” A
“bear” is a speculator on the Exchange; and a “bull,” although of an
opposite order, follows a like profession. There is something very
humorous and applicable in the Slang term “lame duck,” a defaulter in
stock-jobbing speculations. The allusion to his “waddling out of the
Alley,” as they say, is excellent. “Breaking shins,” in City Slang, is
borrowing money; a rotten or unsound scheme is spoken of as “fishy;”
“rigging the market” means playing tricks with it; and “stag” was a
common term during the railway mania for a speculator without capital, a
seller of “scrip” in “Diddlesex Junction” and other equally safe lines.
At Tattersall’s a “monkey” is 500_l._, and in the City a “plum” is
100,000_l._, and a “marygold” is one million sterling. But before
proceeding further in a sketch of the different kinds of Slang, it may
be as well to speak here of the extraordinary number of Cant and Slang
terms in use to represent money—from farthings to bank-notes the value
of fortunes. Her Majesty’s coin, collectively or in the piece, is known
by more than one hundred and thirty distinct Slang words, from the
humble “brown” (a halfpenny) to “flimsies,” or “long-tailed ones”
(bank-notes).

“Money,” it has been well remarked, “the bare, simple word itself, has a
sonorous, significant ring in its sound,” and might have sufficed, one
would have imagined, for all ordinary purposes, excepting, of course,
those demanded by direct reference to specific sums. But a vulgar or
“fast” society has thought differently; and so we have the Slang
synonyms—“beans,” “blunt” (_i.e._, specie,—not soft or rags,
bank-notes), “brads,” “brass,” “bustle,” “coppers” (copper money, or
mixed pence), “chink,” “chinkers,” “chips,” “corks,” “dibbs,” “dinarly,”
“dimmock,” “dust,” “feathers,” “gent” (silver,—from argent), “haddock”
(a purse of money), “horse nails,” “huckster,” “loaver,” “lour” (the
oldest Cant term for money), “mopusses,” “needful,” “nobbings” (money
collected in a hat by street-performers), “ochre” (gold), “pewter,”
“palm oil,” “pieces,” “posh,” “queen’s pictures,” “quids,” “rags”
(bank-notes), “ready,” or “ready gilt,” “redge” (gold), “rhino,”
“rowdy,” “shiners” (sovereigns), “skin” (a purse of money), “stiff”
(checks, or bills of acceptance), “stuff,” “stumpy,” “tin” (silver),
“wedge” (silver), and “yellow-boys” (sovereigns);—just forty-three
vulgar equivalents for the simple word money. So attentive is Slang
speech to financial matters, that there are seven terms for bad, or
“bogus,” coin (as our friends the Americans call it): a “case” is a
counterfeit five-shilling piece; “half a case” represents half that sum;
“grays” are halfpence made specially for unfair gambling purposes;
“queer-soft” is counterfeit or lead coin; “schofel” refers to coated or
spurious coin; “sheen” is bad money of any description; and “sinkers”
bears the same and not inappropriate meaning. “Snide” is now the generic
term for all bad money, whether coined or in notes; and “snide-pitching”
or “schoful-tossing” is the term in use among the professors of that
pursuit for what is more generally known as “smashing.” “Flying the
kite,” or obtaining money on bills and promissory-notes, is closely
connected with the allegorical expression of “raising the wind,” which
is a well-known phrase for procuring money by immediate sale, pledging,
or by a forced loan. In winter or in summer any elderly gentleman who
may have prospered in life is pronounced “warm;” whilst an equivalent is
immediately at hand in the phrase “his pockets are well lined,” or “he
is well breeched.” Each separate piece of money has its own Slang term,
and often half a score of synonyms. To begin with that extremely humble
coin, a farthing: first we have “fadge,” then “fiddler;” then “gig,” and
lastly “quartereen.” A halfpenny is a “brown” or a “madzer (pronounced
‘medzer’) saltee” (Cant), or a “mag,” or a “posh,” or a “rap,”—whence
the popular phrase, “I don’t care a rap.” The useful and universal penny
has for Slang equivalents a “copper,” a “saltee” (Cant), and a “winn.”
Twopence is a “deuce,” and threepence is either “thrums” or “thrups.”
“Thrums” has a special peculiarity; for while “thrums-buskin” represents
threepence-halfpenny, the term “buskin” is not used in connexion with
any other number of pence. Fourpence, or a groat, may in vulgar speech
be termed a “bit,” a “flag,” or a “joey.” Sixpence is well represented
in street talk, and some of the slangisms are very comical—for
instance, “bandy,” “bender,” “cripple,” and “downer;” then we have
“buck,” “fye-b’ck,” “half a hog,” “kick” (thus “two and a ‘kick,’” or
2_s._ 6_d._), “lord of the manor,”[56] “pig,” “pot” (the price of a pot
of ale—thus half-a-crown is a “five ‘pot’ piece”), “snid,” “sprat,”
“sow’s baby,” “tanner,” “tester,” “tizzy,”—seventeen vulgar words to
one coin. Sevenpence being an uncommon amount has only one Slang
synonym, “setter.” The same remark applies to eightpence and ninepence,
the former being only represented by “otter,” and the latter by the
Cant phrase “nobba-saltee.” Tenpence is “dacha-saltee,” and elevenpence
“dacha-one,”—both Cant expressions. It is noticeable that coined
pieces, and sums which from their smallness or otherwise are mostly in
use, receive a commensurate amount of attention from promoters of Slang.
One shilling boasts eleven Slang equivalents; thus we have “beong,”
“bob,” “breaky-leg,” “deener,” “gen” (from the back Slang), “hog,”
“levy,” “peg,” “stag,” “teviss,” and “twelver.” One shilling and
sixpence is a “kye,” now and then an “eighteener.” It is noticeable that
so far the florin has escaped, and only receives the shilling titles
with the required numeral adjective prefixed. Half-a-crown is known as
an “alderman,” “half a bull,” “half a wheel,” “half a tusheroon,” and a
“madza (medzer) caroon;” whilst a crown piece, or five shillings, may be
called either a “bull,” a “caroon,” a “cartwheel,” or a “coachwheel,”
or, more generally than either, a “wheel” or a “tusheroon.” The word
“dollar” is in general use among costermongers and their customers, and
signifies exactly five shillings. Any term representing this amount
“takes in two,” and represents the half-crown by the addition of the
usual prefix. The next advance in Slang money is ten shillings, or
half-a-sovereign, which may be either pronounced as “half a bean,” “half
a couter,” “a madza poona,” “half a quid,” or “half a thick ’un.” A
sovereign, or twenty shillings, is a “bean,” “canary,” “couter,”
“foont,” “goldfinch,” “James” (from Jacobus), “poona,” “portrait,”
“quid,” “thick-un,” or “yellow-boy.” Guineas are nearly obsolete, yet
the terms “neds” and “half neds” are still in use. Bank-notes are
“flimsies,” “long-tailed ones,” or “soft.” A “fin,” or a “finnuf,” is a
five-pound note. Twenty-five pounds is a “pony,” and a hundred a
“century.” One hundred pounds (or any other “round sum”), quietly handed
over as payment for services performed, is curiously termed “a ‘cool’
hundred.” Thus ends, with several necessary omissions, this long list of
Slang terms for the coins of the realm which, for copiousness, it is not
too much to say, is not equalled by any other vulgar or unauthorized
language in Europe.

The antiquity of many of these Slang names is remarkable. “Winn” was the
vulgar term for a penny in the days of Queen Elizabeth; and “tester,” a
sixpence (formerly a shilling), was the correct name in the days of
Henry VIII. The reader, too, will have remarked the frequency of
animals’ names as Slang terms for money. Little, as a modern writer has
remarked, do the persons using these phrases know of their remote and
somewhat classical origin, which may, indeed, be traced to a period
anterior to that when monarchs monopolized the surface of coined money
with their own images and superscriptions. They are identical with the
very name of money among the early Romans, which was _pecunia_, from
_pecus_, a flock. The collections of coin-dealers amply show that the
figure of a “hog” was anciently placed on a small silver coin; and that
that of a “bull” decorated larger ones of the same metal. These coins
were frequently deeply crossed on the reverse; this was for the
convenience of easily breaking them into two or more pieces, should the
bargain for which they were employed require it, and the parties making
it had no smaller change handy to complete the transaction. Thus we find
that the “half bull” of the itinerant street-seller, or “traveller,” so
far from being a phrase of modern invention, as is generally supposed,
is in point of fact referable to an era extremely remote. This remark
will safely apply to most descriptions of money; and it must not be
forgotten that farthing is but a corruption of fourthing, or, literally,
fourth part of a penny. The representative coin of the realm was often
in olden times made to break up,—but this by the way. It is a reminder,
however, that the word “smash,” as used by the classes that speak Slang
from motives other than those of affectation, has nothing whatever to do
with base coin, as is generally supposed. It simply means to give
change. Thus:—“Can you smash a thick ’un for me?” means simply, “Can
you give me change for a sovereign?” We learn from Erizzo, in his
_Discorso_, a further illustration of the proverb “that there is nothing
new under the sun;” for he says that the Roman boys at the time of
Hadrian tossed up their coppers and cried, “Head or ship;” of which
tradition our “heads or tails,” and “man or woman,” or “a tanner I heads
’em,” is certainly a less refined version. We thence gather, however,
that the prow of a vessel would appear to have been the more ordinary
device of the reverse of the brass coin of that ancient period. There
are many other Cant words directly from a classic source, as will be
seen in the dictionary.

Shopkeepers’ Slang is perhaps the most offensive of all Slang, though
this is not intended to imply that shopkeepers are perhaps the most
offensive of people. This kind of Slang is not a casual eyesore, as
newspaper Slang, neither is it an occasional discomfort to the ear, as
in the case of some vulgar byword of the street; but it is a perpetual
nuisance, and stares you in the face on tradesmen’s invoices, on labels
in the shop-windows, and placards on the hoardings, in posters against
the house next to your own—if it happen to be empty for a few
weeks—and in bills thrust into your hand, as you peaceably walk through
the streets. Under your door, and down your area, Slang handbills are
dropped by some “pushing” tradesman; and for the thousandth time you are
called upon to learn that an “alarming sacrifice” is taking place in the
next street; that prices are “down again;” that, in consequence of some
other tradesman not “driving a roaring trade,” being in fact, “sold up,”
and for the time being a resident in “Burdon’s Hotel” (Whitecross-Street
Prison), the “pushing” tradesman wishes to sell out at “awfully low
prices,” to “the kind patrons, and numerous customers,” &c. &c., “that
have on every occasion,” &c. &c. These are, though, very venial
offenders compared with those ghouls, the advertising undertakers, who
employ boys, loaded with ghastly little books, to follow up the parish
doctor, and leave their horrible wares wherever he calls. But what can
be expected of ignorant undertakers when a London newspaper of large
circulation actually takes out the death records from the _Times_, and
sends a circular to each address therein, informing the bereaved persons
that the “----” charges so much per line for similar notices, and that
its circulation is most extensive? Surely the typical “death-hunter,”
hardened though he may be, is hardly down to that level. In shopkeeping
Slang any occupation or calling is termed a “line,”—thus, the “building
line.” A tailor usurps to himself a good deal of Slang. Amongst
operatives he is called a “snip,” a “steel-bar driver,” a “cabbage
contractor,” or a “goose persuader;” by the world, a “ninth part of a
man;” and by the young collegian, or “fast” man, a “sufferer.” If he
takes army contracts, it is “sank work;” if he is a “slop” tailor, he is
a “springer up,” and his garments are “blown together.” Perquisites with
him are “spiffs,” and remnants of cloth “peaking, or cabbage.” The
per-centage he allows to his assistants (or “counter jumpers”) on the
sale of old-fashioned articles is termed “tinge.” If he pays his workmen
in goods, or gives them tickets upon other tradesmen, with whom he
shares the profit, he is soon known as a “tommy master.” If his business
succeeds, it “takes;” if neglected, it becomes “shaky,” and “goes to
pot;” if he is deceived by a debtor (a by no means unusual
circumstance), he is “let in,” or, as it is sometimes varied, “taken
in.” It need scarcely be remarked that any credit he may give is termed
“tick.”

Operatives’ or workmen’s Slang, in quality, is but slightly removed from
tradesmen’s Slang. When belonging to the same shop or factory, they
“graft” there, and are “brother chips.” Among printers the favourite
term is “comps,”—not compositors, though the same contraction is used
for that word,—but companions, whether so in actual fact, or as members
of the same “companionship.” A companionship is the number of men
engaged on any one work, and this is in turn reduced to “ship:”
sometimes it is a “’stab ship,” _i.e._, paid by the week, therefore on
the establishment; sometimes it is “on the piece,” and anyhow it is an
extremely critical organization, so perhaps it would be better to
broaden the subject. Workmen generally dine at “slap-bang shops,” and
are often paid at “tommy shops.” At the nearest “pub,” or public-house,
they generally have a “score chalked up” against them, which has to be
“wiped off” regularly on the Saturday night. This is often known as a
“light.” When credit is bad the “light” is said to be out. When out of
work, they describe themselves as being “out of collar.” They term each
other “flints” and “dungs,” if they are “society” or “non-society” men.
Their salary is a “screw,” and to be discharged is to “get the sack,”
varied by the expression “get the bullet,” the connexion of which with
discharge is obvious, as the small lecturers—those at the Polytechnic
for instance—say, to the meanest capacity. When they quit work, they
“knock off;” and when out of employ, they ask if any “hands” are, or any
assistance is, wanted. “Fat” is the vulgar synonym for perquisites;
“elbow grease” signifies labour; and “Saint Monday” is the favourite day
of the week. Names of animals figure plentifully in the workman’s
vocabulary; thus we have “goose,” a tailor’s smoothing-iron;
“sheep’s-foot,” an iron hammer; “sow,” a receptacle for molten iron,
whilst the metal poured from it is termed “pig.” Many of the Slang terms
for money may have originally come from the workshop, thus—“brads,”
from the ironmonger; “chips,” from the carpenter; “dust,” from the
goldsmith; “feathers,” from the upholsterer; “horse-nails,” from the
farrier; “haddock,” from the fishmonger; and “tanner and skin” from the
leather-dresser.

If society, as has been remarked, is a sham, from the vulgar foundation
of commonalty to the crowning summit of royalty, then do we perceive the
justness of the remark in that most peculiar of peculiarities, the Slang
of makeshifts for oaths, and sham exclamations for passion and temper.
These apologies for feeling are an addition to our vernacular, and
though some argue that they are a disgrace, for the reason that no man
should pretend to swear or curse who does not do so, it is some
satisfaction to know that they serve the purpose of reducing the stock
of national profanity. “You be blowed,” or “I’ll be blowed if,” &c., is
an exclamation often heard in the streets. “Blazes,” or “like blazes,”
came probably from the army, unless, indeed, it came from the original
metaphor, afterwards corrupted, to serve all turns, “to smoke like
blazes.” “Blast,” too, although in general vulgar use, may have had an
engineering or military origin, and the phrase, “I wish I may be shot,
if,” smacks much of powder. “Blow me tight” is a very windy and common
exclamation. The same may be said of “strike me lucky,” “never trust
me,” and “so help me Davy;” the latter being evidently derived from the
truer old phrase, “I’ll take my Davy on’t”—_i.e._, my affidavit,
“Davy,” and sometimes “Alfred Davy,” being a corruption of that word.
“By Golly,” “Gol darn it,” and “so help”—generally pronounced “selp” or
“swelp”—“me Bob,” are evident shams for profane oaths. “Tarnation” is
but a softening of damnation; and “od,” whether used in “od drat it,” or
“od’s blood,” is but an apology for the name of the Deity. “Marry,” a
term of asseveration in common use, was originally, in Popish times, a
mode of swearing by the Virgin Mary;—so also “marrow-bones,” for the
knees. “I’ll bring him down upon his marrow-bones,”—_i.e._, I’ll make
him bend his knees as he does to the Virgin Mary. The Irish phrase, “Bad
scran to yer!” is equivalent to wishing a person bad food. “I’m
sniggered if you will,” and “I’m jiggered,” are other mild forms of
swearing among men fearful of committing an open profanity, yet slily
nibbling at the sin. Maybe, some day one of these adventurers will meet
with the object of his desires, and then when fairly “jiggered,”
whatever it may ultimately turn out to be, it is to be hoped he will
prove a fearful example to all persons with the will, but not the pluck,
to swear fierce oaths. Both “deuce” and “dickens” are vulgar old
synonyms for the devil; and “zounds” is an abbreviation of “God’s
wounds,”—a very ancient oath.

In a casual survey of the territory of Slang, it is curious to observe
how well represented are the familiar wants and failings of life. First,
there is money, with one hundred and odd Slang terms and synonyms; then
comes drink, from small beer to champagne; and next as a very natural
sequence, intoxication, and fuddlement generally, with some half a
hundred vulgar terms, graduating the scale of drunkenness, from a slight
inebriation to the soaky state which leads to the gutter, sometimes to
the stretcher, the station-house, the fine, and, most terrible of all,
the “caution.” The Slang synonyms for mild intoxication are certainly
very choice,—they are “beery,” “bemused,” “boozy,” “bosky,” “buffy,”
“corned,” “foggy,” “fou,” “fresh,” “hazy,” “elevated,” “kisky,” “lushy,”
“moony,” “muggy,” “muzzy,” “on,” “screwed,” “stewed,” “tight,” and
“winey.” A higher or more intense state of beastliness is represented by
the expressions, “podgy,” “beargered,” “blued,” “cut,” “primed,”
“lumpy,” “ploughed,” “muddled,” “obfuscated,” “swipey,” “three sheets in
the wind,” and “top-heavy.” But the climax of fuddlement is only
obtained when the “disguised” individual “can’t see a hole in a ladder,”
or when he is all “mops and brooms,” or “off his nut,” or with his
“main-brace well spliced,” or with the “sun in his eyes,” or when he
has “lapped the gutter,” and got the “gravel rash,” or is on the
“ran-tan,” or on the “ree-raw,” or when “sewed up,” and regularly
“scammered,”—then, and not till then, is he entitled, in vulgar
society, to the title of “lushington,” or recommended to “put in the
pin,” _i.e._, the linch-pin, to keep his legs steady.


FOOTNOTES:

[32] An outgrowth of this latter peculiarity consisted in anyone with a
high or prominent nose being, a few years back, called by the street
boys “Duke.”

[33] This term, with a singular literal downrightness, which would be
remarkable in any other people than the French, is translated by them as
the sect of _Trembleurs_.

[34] Swift alludes to this term in his _Art of Polite Conversation_, p.
14, 1738.

[35] See _Notes and Queries_, vol. i. p. 185. 1850.

[36] He afterwards kept a tavern at Wapping, mentioned by Pope in the
_Dunciad_.

[37] _Sportsman’s Dictionary_, 1825, p. 15.

[38] This introduction was written in 1859, before the new edition of
_Worcester_, and Nuttall’s recent work, were published.

[39] Introduction to Bee’s _Sportsman’s Dictionary_, 1825.

[40] The Gipsies use the word Slang as the Anglican synonym for Romany,
the Continental (or rather Spanish) term for the Cingari or Gipsy
tongue. Crabb, who wrote the _Gipsies’ Advocate_ in 1831, thus mentions
the word:—“This language [Gipsy] _called by themselves_ Slang, or
Gibberish, invented, as they think, by their forefathers for secret
purposes, is not merely the language of one or a few of these wandering
tribes, which are found in the European nations, but is adopted by the
vast numbers who inhabit the earth.”

[41] The word Slang assumed various meanings amongst costermongers,
beggars, and vagabonds of all orders. It was, and is still, used to
express “cheating by false weights,” “a raree show,” “retiring by a back
door,” “a watch-chain,” their “secret language,” &c.

[42] North, in his _Examen_, p. 574, says, “I may note that the rabble
first changed their title, and were called the “mob” in the assemblies
of this [Green Ribbon] club. It was their beasts of burden, and called
first _mobile vulgus_, but fell naturally into the contraction of one
syllable, and ever since is become proper English.” In the same work, p.
231, the disgraceful origin of SHAM is given.

[43] I am afraid my predecessor was of a somewhat satirical turn of
mind, or else he had peculiar notions of melody.—ED.

[44] This latter is, as I take it, an error, as the sign was originally
intended to represent the king’s head and cross guns, and may still be
seen in parts of the country.—ED.

[45] Savez-vous cela?—[I fancy this is from the Spanish _sabe_. The
word is in great use in the Pacific States of America, and is obtained
through constant intercourse with the original settlers.—ED.]

[46] At page 24 of a curious old Civil War tract, entitled, _The Oxonian
Antippodes_, by I. B., Gent., 1644, the town is called Brummidgham, and
this was the general rendering in the printed literature of the
seventeenth century.—[This must have been the first known step towards
the present vulgar style of spelling, for properly the word is
Bromwich-ham, which has been corrupted into Brummagem, a term used to
express worthless or inferior goods, from the spurious jewellery, plate,
&c., manufactured there expressly for “duffers.”—ED.]

[47] This was more especially an amusement with medical students,
after the modern Mohocks had discarded it. The students are now a
comparatively mild and quiet race, with very little of the style of a
generation ago about them.

[48] _Edinburgh Review_, October, 1853.

[49] A term derived from the _Record_ newspaper, the exponent of this
singular section of the Low, or so-called Evangelical Church.

[50] A preacher is said, in this phraseology, to be “owned” when he
makes many converts, and his converts are called his “seals.” This is
Cant in its most objectionable form.

[51] “Swaddler” is also a phrase by which the low Irish Roman Catholics
denominate those of their body who in winter become Protestants, _pro
tem._, for the sake of the blankets, coals, &c., given by proselytizing
Protestants. It is hard to say which are the worse, those who refuse to
give unless the objects of their charity become converted, or those who
sham conversion to save themselves from starving, or the tender mercies
of the relieving officer. I am much afraid my sympathies are with the
“swaddlers,” who are also called “soupers.”—ED.

[52] “All our newspapers contain more or less colloquial words; in fact,
there seems no other way of expressing certain ideas connected with
passing events of every-day life with the requisite force and piquancy.
In the English newspapers the same thing is observable, and certain of
them contain more of the class denominated Slang words than our
own.”—_Bartlett’s Americanisms_, p. 10, edit. 1859.

[53] When this appeared, “all serene” was one of those street phrases
which periodically spring up, have their rage, and depart as suddenly as
they come into popularity. These sayings are generally of a most idiotic
nature, as their latest specimens, “I’ll warm yer,” “All serene,” and
“I’ll ’ave your hi”—used without any premonitory notice or regard to
context, and screeched out at the top of the voice—will testify. I
suppose we shall soon have another of these “ebullitions of popular
feeling.”—ED.

[54] The terms “leader” and “article” can scarcely be called Slang, yet
it would be desirable to know upon what authority they were first
employed in their present peculiar sense.

[55] The _Morning Herald_ was called “Mrs. Harris,” because it was said
that no one ever saw it, a peculiarity which, in common with its general
disregard for veracity, made it uncommonly like “Mrs. Gamp’s” invisible
friend as portrayed by Dickens. But the _Herald_ has long since departed
this life, and with it has gone the title of “Mrs. Gamp,” as applied to
the _Standard_, which is, though, as impulsive and Conservative as
ever.—ED.

[56] This is rhyming slang, and is corrupted into “lord” only.
“Touch-me,” a common term for a shilling, is also derived from the same
source, it being short for “touch-me-on-the-nob,” which is rhyming slang
for “bob” or shilling.




THE

SLANG DICTIONARY.


~A 1~, first-rate, the very best; “she’s a prime girl, she is; she is
A 1.”—_Sam Slick_. The highest classification of ships at Lloyd’s; common
term in the United States; also at Liverpool and other English seaports.
Another, even more intensitive form is “first-class, letter A, No. 1.”
Some people choose to say A I, for no reason, however, beyond that of
being different from others.

~Abigail~, a lady’s-maid; perhaps obtained from old comedies. Used in an
uncomplimentary sense. Some think the term is derived from Abigail Hill
(Mrs. Masham), lady-in-waiting to Queen Anne, and a typical ABIGAIL in
the way of intrigue.

~About Right~, “to do the thing ABOUT RIGHT,” _i.e._, to do it
properly, soundly, correctly; “he guv it ’im ABOUT RIGHT,” _i.e._, he
beat him severely.

~Abraham-man~, a vagabond, such as were driven to beg about the country
after the dissolution of the monasteries.—_See_ BESS O’ BEDLAM,
_infra_. They are well described under the title of _Bedlam
Beggars_.—_Shakspeare’s K. Lear_, ii. 3.

    “And these, what name or title e’er they bear,
    Jarkman, or Patrico, Cranke, or Clapper-dudgeon,
    Frater, or ABRAM-MAN; I speak to all
    That stand in fair election for the title
    Of king of beggars.”—_Beaumont and Fletcher’s Begg. Bush._ II. 1.

It appears to have been the practice in former days to allow certain
inmates of Bethlehem Hospital to have fixed days “to go begging:” hence
impostors were said to “SHAM ABRAHAM” (the Abraham Ward in Bedlam having
for its inmates these mendicant lunatics) when they pretended they were
licensed beggars in behalf of the hospital.

~Abraham-sham~, or SHAM ABRAHAM, to feign sickness or distress. From
ABRAHAM-MAN, the _ancient Cant_ term for a begging impostor, or one who
pretended to have been mad.—_Burton’s Anatomy of Melancholy_, vol. i.
p. 360. When Abraham Newland was Cashier to the Bank of England, and
signed their notes, it was sung:—

        “I have heard people say
        That SHAM ABRAHAM you may,
    But you mustn’t SHAM ABRAHAM Newland.”

~Absquatulate~, to run away, or abscond; a hybrid _American_ expression,
from the Latin _ab_, and “squat” to settle.

~Acres~, a coward. From Bob Acres, in Sheridan’s _Rivals_.

~Adam’s Ale~, water.—_English._ The _Scotch_ term is ADAM’S WINE.

~Added to the List~, a euphuism current among sporting writers implying
that a horse has been gelded. As, “Sabinus has been ADDED TO THE LIST.”
Another form of expression in reference to this matter is that “the
knife has been brought into requisition.” “ADDED TO THE LIST” is simply
a contraction for “added to the list of geldings in training.”

~Addlepate~, a foolish fellow, a dullard.

~Admiral of the Red~, a person whose very red face evinces a fondness
for strong potations.

~Affygraphy.~ “It fits to an AFFYGRAPHY,” _i.e._, to a nicety—to a _T_.

~Afternoon Farmer~, one who wastes his best opportunity, and drives off
the large end of his work to the little end of his time.

~Against the Grain~, in opposition to the wish. “It went AGAINST THE
GRAIN to do it, but I knew I must,” is a common expression.

~Aggerawators~ (corruption of _Aggravators_), the greasy locks of hair
in vogue among costermongers and other street folk, worn twisted from
the temple back towards the ear. They are also, from a supposed
resemblance in form, termed NEWGATE KNOCKERS, and sometimes NUMBER
SIXES. This style of adorning the head is, however, fast dying out, and
the everyday costermonger or street thief has his hair cut like any one
else. The yearly militia drill may have had a good deal to do with this
alteration.

~Akeybo~, a slang phrase used in the following manner:—“He beats
AKEYBO, and AKEYBO beat the devil.”

~Albertopolis~, a facetious appellation given by the Londoners to the
Kensington Gore district. Now obsolete.

~Alderman~, a half-crown—possibly from its rotundity. Also a long pipe.

~Alderman~, a turkey; “ALDERMAN IN CHAINS,” a turkey hung with sausages.

~All of a Hugh!~ all on one side; falling with a thump; the word HUGH
being pronounced with a grunt.—_Suffolk._

~All my Eye~, a remark of incredulity made in reference to an improbable
story; condensation of “ALL MY EYE AND BETTY MARTIN,” a vulgar phrase
constructed from the commencement of a Roman Catholic prayer to St.
Martin, “Oh, mihi, beate Martine,” which in common with many another
fell into discredit and ridicule after the Reformation.

~All out~, by far;—“he was ALL OUT the best of the lot.”
_Old_—frequently used by Burton in his _Anatomy of Melancholy_.

~All-overish~, neither sick nor well; the premonitory symptoms of
illness. Also the feeling which comes over a man at a critical moment,
say just when he is about to “pop the question.” Sometimes this is
called, “feeling all over alike, and touching nowhere.”

~All-rounder~, a shirt collar going all round the neck and meeting in
front. Once fashionable, but little worn now.

~All Serene~, an ejaculation of acquiescence. Some years back a popular
street cry. With or without application to actual fact, the words ALL
SERENE were bawled from morning to night without any reference to the
serenity of the unfortunate hearers.—_See_ SERENE.

~Alls~, tap-droppings, refuse spirits sold at a cheap rate in
gin-palaces.

~All There~, in strict fashion, first-rate, “up to the mark;” a vulgar
person would speak of a handsome, well-dressed woman as being ALL THERE.
An artisan would use the same phrase to express the capabilities of a
skillful fellow-workman. Sometimes ALL THE WAY THERE. Always used as a
term of encomium.

~All to Pieces~, utterly, excessively; “he beat him ALL TO PIECES,”
_i.e._, excelled or surpassed him exceedingly. Also a term much in use
among sporting men and expressing want of form, or decadence. A boat’s
crew are said to “go ALL TO PIECES” when they through distress lose
their regularity. A woman is vulgarly said to “fall to pieces,” or
“tumble to pieces,” when she is confined.

~All to Smash~, or “GONE ALL TO PIECES,” bankrupt, ruined.

~Almighty Dollar~, an _American_ expression representing the manner in
which money is worshipped. Modernly introduced by Washington Irving in
1837. The _idea_ of this phrase is, however, far older than the time of
_Irving_. _Ben Jonson’s Epistle to Elizabeth, Countess of Rutland_,
commences thus—

    “Whilst that for which all virtue now is sold,
    And almost every vice, _almightie gold_.”

It seems almost obvious that the term must have been applied, not to
dollars certainly, but to money, long before the time of Irving.

~American Tweezers~, an instrument used by an hotel-sneak which nips the
wards end of a key, and enables him to open a door from the opposite
side to that on which it has been locked.

~Andrew Millar~, a ship of war.—_Sea._

~Ain’t~, the vulgar abbreviation of “am not,” “are not,” or “is not.”

~Anointed~, _i.e._, eminent; used to express great rascality in any one;
“an ANOINTED scoundrel,” king among scoundrels.—_Irish._

~Anointing~, a good beating. A case for the application of salve.

~Anonyma~, a lady of the _demi-monde_, or worse; a “pretty
horsebreaker.” INCOGNITA was the term at first. Product of the
squeamishness of the age which tries to thrust away fact by the use of
fine words.

~Antiscriptural~, oaths, foul language. Anything unfit for ordinary
society conversation.

~Apartments to Let~, a term used in reference to one who has a somewhat
empty head. As, “He’s got APARTMENTS TO LET.”

~Apostle’s Grove~, the London district known as St. John’s Wood. Also
called GROVE OF THE EVANGELIST.

~Apostles~, THE TWELVE, the last twelve names on the Poll, or “Ordinary
Degree” List at the Cambridge Examinations, when it was arranged in
order of merit, and not alphabetically, and in classes, as at present;
so called from their being _post alios_, after the others.—_See_ POLL.
The last of all was called ST. PAUL (or Saint Poll), as being the least
of the apostles, and “not meet to be called an apostle” (_see_ 1 Cor.
xv. 9). As in the “Honour” list (_see_ GULF), students who had failed
only slightly in one or more subjects were occasionally allowed their
degrees, and these were termed ELEGANT EXTRACTS.—_Camb. Univ. Slang._

~Apple-pie Bed~, a trick played at schools on new comers, or on any boy
disliked by the rest. One of the sheets is removed, and the other is
doubled in the middle, so that both edges are brought to the top, and
look as if both sheets were there; but the unhappy occupant is prevented
getting more than half-way down, and he has to remake his bed as best he
can. This trick is sometimes played by children of a larger growth.

~Apple-Cart~, the human structure, so far as the phrases with which it
is connected are concerned. As “I’ll upset your APPLE-CART,” “down with
his APPLE-CART.”

~Apple-pie Order~, in exact or very nice order.

~Appro~, contraction of approbation, a word much in use among jewellers.
Most of the extensive show of chains, watches, and trinkets in a shop
window is obtained “ON APPRO,” _i.e._, “on sale or return.”

~Area Sneak~, a thief who commits depredations upon kitchens and
cellars.

~Argol-bargol~, to bandy words.—_Scotch._

~Article~, derisive term for a weak or insignificant specimen of
humanity.

~Atomy~, a diminutive or deformed person. From ANATOMY, or ATOM.

~Attack~, to carve, or commence operations; “ATTACK that beef, and
oblige!”

~Attic~, the head; “queer in the ATTIC,” intoxicated or weak-minded.
Sometimes ATTIC is varied by “upper story.”

~Attic Salt~, wit, humour, pleasantry. Partly a reference to a
suggestive portion of Grecian literature, and partly a sly hit at the
well-known poverty of many writers.

~Auctioneer~, to “tip him the AUCTIONEER,” is to knock a man down. Tom
Sayers’s right hand was known to pugilistic fame as the AUCTIONEER.

~Audit Ale~, extra strong ale supposed to be drunk when the accounts are
audited.—_Camb. Univ._

~Auld-Reekie~, an affectionate term for the old town of Edinburgh.
Derived from its dingy appearance.

~Aunt Sally~, a favourite figure on racecourses and at fairs, consisting
of a wooden head mounted on a stick, firmly fixed in the ground; in the
nose of which, or rather where the nose should be, a tobacco-pipe is
inserted. The fun consists in standing at a distance and demolishing
AUNT SALLY’S pipe-clay projection with short bludgeons, very similar to
the halves of broom-handles. The Duke of Beaufort is a “crack hand” at
smashing pipe noses; and his performances some years ago on Brighton
racecourse, which brought the game into notoriety, are yet fresh in
remembrance. AUNT SALLY has, however, had her day, and once again the
inevitable “three shies a penny!” is chief among our outdoor amusements.

~Avast~, a sailor’s phrase for stop, shut up, go away,—apparently
connected with the _old Cant_, BYNGE A WASTE; or from the _Italian_,
BASTA, hold! enough.

~Awake~, or FLY, knowing, thoroughly understanding. “I’m awake,” _i.e._,
I know all. The phrase WIDE-AWAKE carries a similar meaning in ordinary
conversation, but has a more general reference.

~Awful~, a senseless expletive, used to intensify a description of
anything good or bad; “what an AWFUL fine woman!” “awfully jolly,”
“awfully sorry,” &c. The phrase is not confined to any section of
society.

~Ax~, to ask. Sometimes pronounced arks.

~Babes~, the lowest order of KNOCK-OUTS (which _see_), who are prevailed
upon not to give opposing biddings at auctions, in consideration of
their receiving a small sum (from one shilling to half-a-crown), and a
certain quantity of beer. They can, however, even after this agreement,
be secured on the other side for a little longer price. There is no
honour among thieves—at all events not among auction thieves—nowadays.

~Back~, to support by means of money, on the turf or otherwise.—_See_
LAY.

~Back~, “to get one’s BACK UP,” to annoy or enrage. Probably from the
action of a cat when preparing to give battle to an enemy.

~Back-end~, that portion of the year which commences with October. This
phrase is peculiar to the turf, and has its origin in the fact that
October was actually, and is now nearly, the finishing portion of the
racing season. Towards BACK-END the punters and “little men” generally
begin to look forward with anxiety to their winter prospects, and “going
for the gloves” is not only a frequent phrase, but a frequently
recurring practice.

~Back Out~, to retreat from a difficulty; reverse of GO AHEAD. Metaphor
borrowed from the stables.

~Back Slang It~, to go out the back way. Equivalent to “Sling your hook
out of the back-door,” _i.e._, get away quickly.

~Backslums~, the byeways and disreputable portions of a town.

~Back-Hander~, a blow on the face with the back of the hand, a
back-handed tip. Also a drink out of turn, as when a greedy person
delays the decanter to get a second glass. Anything done slyly or
secretly is said to be done in a back-handed manner.

~Backer~, one who places his money on a particular man or animal; a
supporter of one side in a contest. The great body of betting men is
divided into BOOKMAKERS and BACKERS.

~Back Jump~, a back window.—_Prison term._

~Bacon~, the body, “to save one’s BACON,” to escape.

~Bad~, “to go to the bad,” to deteriorate in character, to be ruined.
_Virgil_ has an almost similar phrase, _in pejus ruere_, which means, by
the way, to go to the worse.

~Bad~, hard, difficult. Word in use among sporting men who say, “He will
be BAD to beat,” when they mean that the man or horse to whom they refer
will about win.

~Bad Egg~, a scoundrel or rascal.

~Badger~, to tease, to annoy by “chaffing.” Suggestive of drawing a
badger.

~Bad Lot~, a term derived from auctioneering slang, and now generally
used to describe a man or woman of indifferent morals.

~Badminton~, blood,—properly a peculiar kind of claret-cup invented at
the Duke of Beaufort’s seat of that name. BADMINTON proper is made of
claret, sugar, spice, cucumber peel, and ice, and was sometimes used by
the patrons of the Prize Ring as a synonym for blood.

~Bad Words~, words not always bad of themselves but unpleasant to “ears
polite,” from their vulgar associations.

~Baffaty~, calico. Term used in the drapery trade.

~Bag~, to seize or steal, equivalent to “collar.”

~Bagman~, a commercial traveller. This word is used more in reference to
the old style of commercial travellers than to the present.

~Bags~, trousers. Trousers of an extensive pattern, or exaggerated
fashion, have sometimes been termed HOWLING-BAGS, but only when the
style has been very “loud.” The word is probably an abbreviation of
bumbags. “To have the BAGS off,” to be of age and one’s own master, to
have plenty of money. BAGS OF MYSTERY is another phrase in frequent use,
and refers to sausages and saveloys. BAG OF TRICKS, refers to the whole
of a means towards a result. “That’s the whole bag of tricks.”

~Baked~, seasoned, “he’s only HALF-BAKED,” _i.e._, soft, inexperienced.

~Baker’s Dozen~, thirteen. Originally the London bakers supplied the
retailers, _i.e._, chandlers’ shopkeepers and itinerants, with thirteen
loaves to the dozen, so as to make up what is known as the overweight,
the surplus number, called the _inbread_, being thrown in for fear of
incurring a penalty for short weight. To “give a man a BAKER’S DOZEN,”
in a slang sense, sometimes means to give him an extra good beating or
pummelling.

~Balaam~, printers’ slang for matter kept in type about monstrous
productions of nature, &c., to fill up spaces in newspapers that would
otherwise be vacant. The term BALAAM-BOX has often been used as the name
of a depository for rejected articles. Evidently from Scripture, and
referring to the “speech of an ass.”

~Bald-Faced Stag~, a term of derision applied to a person with a bald
head. Also, still more coarsely, “BLADDER-OF-LARD.”

~Bale up~, an Australian term equivalent to our “Shell out.” A demand
for instantaneous payment.

~Ballambangjang.~ The Straits of BALLAMBANGJANG, though unnoticed by
geographers, are frequently mentioned in sailors’ yarns as being so
narrow, and the rocks on each side so crowded with trees inhabited by
monkeys, that the ship’s yards cannot be squared, on account of the
monkey’s tails getting jammed into, and choking up, the brace
blocks.—_Sea._

~Ballast~, money. A rich man is said to be well-ballasted. If not proud
and over-bearing he is said to carry his ballast well.

~Balmy~, weak-minded or idiotic (not insane).

~Balmy~, sleep; “have a dose of the BALMY.”

~Bamboozle~, to deceive, make fun of, or cheat a person; abbreviated to
BAM, which is sometimes used also as a substantive—a deception, a sham,
a “sell.” _Swift_ says BAMBOOZLE was invented by a nobleman in the reign
of Charles II.; but this is very likely an error. The probability is
that a nobleman then first _used_ it in polite society. The term is
derived from the _Gipsies_.

~Bandannah~, originally a peculiar kind of silk pocket-handkerchief, now
slang used to denote all sorts of “stooks,” “wipes,” and “fogles,” and
in fact the generic term for a kerchief, whether neck or pocket.

~Banded~, hungry. From the habit hungry folks have of tying themselves
tight round the middle.

~Bandy~, or CRIPPLE, a sixpence, so called from this coin being
generally bent or crooked; old term for flimsy or bad cloth, temp. Q.
Elizabeth.

~Bang~, to excel or surpass; BANGING, great or thumping.

~Bang-up~, first-rate, in the best possible style.

~Bank~, to put in a place of safety. “BANK the rag,” _i.e._, secure the
note. Also “to bank” is to go shares.

~Bank~, the total amount possessed by any one, “How’s the BANK?” “Not
very strong; about one and a buck.”

~Bantling~, a child; stated in _Bacchus and Venus_, 1737, and by
_Grose_, to be a cant term. This is hardly slang now-a-days, and modern
etymologists give its origin as that of bands or swaddling clothes.

~Banyan-Day~, a day on which no meat is served out for rations; probably
derived from the BANIANS, a Hindoo caste, who abstain from animal food.
Quite as probably from the sanitary arrangements which have in hot
climates counselled the eating of BANYANS and other fruits in preference
to meat on certain days.—_Sea._

~Bar~, or BARRING, excepting; in common use in the betting-ring; “Two to
one bar one,” _i.e._, two to one against any horse with the exception of
one. The Irish use of BARRIN’ is very similar, and the words BAR and
BARRING may now be regarded as general.

~Barber’s Cat~, a half-starved sickly-looking person. Term used in
connexion with an expression too coarse to print.

~Barber’s Clerk~, an overdressed shopboy who apes the manners of, and
tries to pass himself off as, a gentleman; a term of reproach applied
not to an artisan but to one of those who, being below, assume airs of
superiority over, handicraftsmen.

~Barge~, a term used among printers (compositors) to denote a case in
which there is an undue proportion of some letters and a corresponding
shortness of those which are most valuable.

~Bark~, an Irish person of either sex. From this term, much in use among
the London lower orders, but for which no etymology can be found,
Ireland is now and then playfully called Barkshire.

~Barker~, a man employed to cry at the doors of “gaffs,” shows, and
puffing shops, to entice people inside. Among touting photographers he
is called a doorsman.

~Barking-Iron~, or BARKER, a pistol. Term used by footpads and thieves
generally.

~Barnacles~, spectacles; possibly a corruption of binoculi; but derived
by some from the barnacle (_Lepas Anatifera_), a kind of conical shell
adhering to ships’ bottoms. Hence a marine term for goggles, which they
resemble in shape, and for which they are used by sailors in case of
ophthalmic derangement.

~Barney~, an unfair race of any kind: a sell or cross. Also a lark,
jollification, or outing. The word BARNEY is sometimes applied to a
swindle unconnected with the sporting world.

~Barn Stormers~, theatrical performers who travel the country and act in
barns, selecting short and tragic pieces to suit the rustic taste.

~Barrikin~, jargon, speech, or discourse; “We can’t tumble to that
BARRIKIN,” _i.e._, we don’t understand what he says. “Cheese your
BARRIKIN,” shut up. _Miege_ calls it “a sort of stuff;” _Old French_,
BARACAN.

~Bash~, to beat, thrash; “BASHING a dona,” beating a woman; originally a
provincial word, applied to the practice of beating walnut trees, when
in bud, with long poles, to increase their productiveness. Hence the
West country proverb—

    “A woman, a whelp, and a walnut tree,
    The more you BASH ’em, the better they be.”

The word BASH, among thieves, signifies to flog with the cat or birch.
The worst that can happen to a brutal ruffian is to receive “a BASHING
in, and a BASHING out,”—a flogging at the commencement and another at
the close of his term of enforced virtue.

~Baste~, to beat, properly to pour gravy on roasting meat to keep it
from burning, and add to its flavour. Also a sewing term.

~Bastile~, the workhouse. General name for “the Union” amongst the lower
orders of the _North_. Formerly used to denote a prison, or “lock-up;”
but its abbreviated form, STEEL, is now the favourite expression with
the dangerous classes, some of whom have never heard of BASTILE,
familiar as they are with “steel.”

~Bat~, “on his own BAT,” on his own account. Evident modification of the
cricket term, “off his own bat,” though not connected therewith.—_See_
HOOK.

~Bat~, to take an innings at cricket. To “carry out one’s BAT” is to be
last in, _i.e._, to be “not out.” A man’s individual score is said to be
made “off his own BAT.”

~Bat~, pace at walking or running. As, “He went off at a good BAT.”

~Bats~, a pair of bad boots.

~Battells~, the weekly bills at Oxford. Probably originally wooden
tallies, and so a diminutive of bâton.—_University._

~Batter~, wear and tear; “can’t stand the BATTER,” _i.e._, not equal to
the task; “on the BATTER,” “on the streets,” “on the town,” or given up
to roystering and debauchery.

~Batty~, wages, perquisites. Derived from BATTA, an extra pay given to
soldiers while serving in _India_.

~Batty-Fang~, to beat; BATTY-FANGING, a beating; also BATTER-FANG. Used
metaphorically as early as 1630.

    “So _batter-fanged_ and belabour’d with tongue mettle, that he was
    weary of his life.”—_Taylor’s Works._

~Beach-Comber~, a fellow who prowls about the sea-shore to plunder
wrecks, and pick up waifs and strays of any kind.—_Sea._

~Beak~, originally a magistrate, judge, or policeman; now a magistrate
only; “to baffle the BEAK,” to get remanded. _Ancient Cant_, BECK.
_Saxon_, BEAG, a necklace or gold collar—emblem of authority. Sir John
Fielding was called the BLIND-BEAK in the last century. Maybe connected
with the Italian BECCO, which means a (bird’s) _beak_, and also a
_blockhead_.—_See_ WALKER.

~Beaker-Hunter~, or BEAK-HUNTER, a stealer of poultry.

~Beans~, money; “a haddock of BEANS,” a purse of money; formerly, BEAN
meant a guinea; _French_, BIENS, property.

~Bear~, one who contracts to deliver or sell a certain quantity of stock
in the public funds on a forthcoming day at a stated place, but who does
not possess it, trusting to a decline in public securities to enable him
to fulfil the agreement and realize a profit.—_See_ BULL. Both words
are slang terms on the Stock Exchange, and are frequently used in the
business columns of newspapers.

    “He who sells that of which he is not possessed is proverbially said
    to sell the skin before he has caught the BEAR. It was the practice
    of stock-jobbers, in the year 1720, to enter into a contract for
    transferring South Sea stock at a future time for a certain price;
    but he who contracted to sell had frequently no stock to transfer,
    nor did he who bought intend to receive any in consequence of his
    bargain; the seller was, therefore, called a BEAR, in allusion to
    the proverb, and the buyer a BULL, perhaps only as a similar
    distinction. The contract was merely a wager, to be determined by
    the rise or fall of stock; if it rose, the seller paid the
    difference to the buyer, proportioned to the sum determined by the
    same computation to the seller.”—_Dr. Warton on Pope._

These arrangements are nowadays called “time bargains,” and are as
fairly (or unfairly) gambling as any transactions at the Victoria Club
or Tattersall’s, or any of the doings which call for the intervention of
the police and the protestations of pompous City magistrates, who,
during their terms of office, try to be virtuous and make their names
immortal. Certainly BULLING and BEARING are as productive of bankruptcy
and misery as are BACKING and LAYING.

~Be-argered~, drunk. (The word is divided here simply to convey the
pronunciation.)

~Bear-Leader~, a tutor in a private family. In the old days of the
“grand tour” the term was much more in use and of course more
significant than it is now.

~Bear-up~ and ~Bearer-up~.—_See_ BONNET.

~Beat~, the allotted range traversed by a policeman on duty.

~Beat~, or BEAT-HOLLOW, to surpass or excel; also “BEAT into fits,” and
“BEAT badly.”

~Beat~, “DEAD-BEAT,” wholly worn out, done up.

~Beater-Cases~, boots. _Nearly obsolete._ TROTTER CASES is the term
nowadays.

~Beaver~, old street term for a hat; GOSS is the modern word, BEAVER,
except in the country, having fallen into disuse.

~Bebee~, a lady.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Be-Blowed~, a derisive instruction never carried into effect, as, “You
BE-BLOWED.” Used similarly to the old “Go to.” _See_ BLOW ME.

~Bed-Fagot~, a contemptuous term for a woman; generally applied to a
prostitute.—_See_ FAGOT.

~Bed-Post~, “in the twinkling of a BED-POST,” in a moment, or very
quickly. Originally BED-STAFF, a stick placed vertically in the frame of
a bed to keep the bedding in its place, and used sometimes as a
defensive weapon.

~Bee~, “to have a BEE in one’s bonnet,” _i.e._, to be not exactly sane;
to have a craze in one particular direction. Several otherwise sensible
and excellent M.P.’s are distinguished by the “BEE in his bonnet” each
carries.

~Beef-Headed~, stupid, fat-headed, dull.

~Beefy~, unduly thick or fat, commonly said of women’s ankles; also
rich, juicy, plenteous. To take the whole pool at loo, or to have any
particular run of luck at cards generally is said by players to be “very
BEEFY.”

~Beeline~, the straightest possible line of route to a given point. When
a bee is well laden, it makes a straight flight for home. Originally an
Americanism, but now general.

~Beery~, intoxicated, or fuddled with beer.

~Beeswax~, poor, soft cheese. Sometimes called “sweaty-toe cheese.”

~Beeswing~, the film which forms on the sides of bottles which contain
good old port wine. This breaks up into small pieces in the process of
decanting, and looks like BEES’ WINGS. Hence the term.

~Beetle-Crusher~, or SQUASHER, a large flat foot. The expression was
made popular by being once used by Leech.

~Beetle-Sticker~, an entomologist.

~Beggars’ Velvet~, downy particles which accumulate under furniture from
the negligence of housemaids. Otherwise called SLUTS’-WOOL.

~Belcher~, a blue bird’s-eye handkerchief.—_See_ BILLY.

~Bell~, a song. Tramps’ term. Simply diminutive of BELLOW.

~Bellows~, the lungs. BELLOWSER, a blow in the “wind,” or pit of the
stomach, taking one’s breath away.

~Bellowsed~, or LAGGED, transported.

~Bellows to Mend~, a person out of breath; especially a pugilist is said
to be “BELLOWS TO MEND” when winded. With the P.R., the word has fallen
into desuetude.

~Belly-Timber~, food, or “grub.”

~Belly-Vengeance~, small sour beer, apt to cause gastralgia.

~Bemuse~, to fuddle one’s self with drink, “BEMUSING himself with beer,”
&c.

~Ben~, a benefit.—_Theatrical._

~Ben Cull~, a friend, or “pal.” Expression used by thieves.

~Bend~, “that’s above my bend,” _i.e._, beyond my power, too expensive or
too difficult for me to perform.

~Bender~, a sixpence. Probably from its liability to bend. In the days
when the term was most in use sixpences were not kept in the excellent
state of preservation peculiar to the currency of the present day.

~Bender~, the arm; “over the BENDER,” synonymous with “over the
left.”—_See_ OVER.

~Bendigo~, a rough fur cap worn in the midland counties, called after a
noted pugilist of that name. “Hard Punchers” are caps worn by London
roughs and formerly by men in training. They are a modification of the
common Scotch cap, and have peaks.

~Bene~, good.—_Ancient Cant_; BENAR was the comparative.—_See_ BONE.
_Latin._

~Benedick~, a married man. _Shakspeare._

~Benjamin~, coat. Formerly termed a JOSEPH, in allusion, perhaps, to
Joseph’s coat of many colours.—_See_ UPPER-BENJAMIN.

~Ben Joltram~, brown bread and skimmed milk; a Norfolk term for a
ploughboy’s breakfast.

~Benjy~, a waistcoat, diminutive of BENJAMIN.

~Beong~, a shilling.—_See_ SALTEE.—_Lingua Franca._

~Bess-o’-Bedlam~, a lunatic vagrant.—_Norfolk._

~Best~, to get the better or BEST of a man in any way—not necessarily
to cheat—to have the best of a bargain. BESTED, taken in, or defrauded,
in reality worsted. BESTER, a low betting cheat, a fraudulent bookmaker.

~Better~, more; “how far is it to town?” “Oh, BETTER ’n a mile.”—_Saxon_
and _Old English_, now a vulgarism.

~Betting Round~, laying fairly and equally against nearly all the horses
in a race so that no great risk can be run. Commonly called getting
round. _See_ BOOK, and BOOKMAKING.

~Betty~, a skeleton key, or picklock.—_Old Prison Cant._

~B Flats~, bugs.—_Compare_ F SHARPS.

~Bible-Carrier~, a person who sells songs without singing them.—_Seven
Dials._

~Biddy~, a general name applied to Irish stallwomen and milkmaids, in
the same manner that Mike is given to the labouring men. A big red-faced
Irish servant girl is known as a Bridget.

~Big~, “to look BIG,” to assume an inflated air or manner; “to talk
BIG,” _i.e._, boastingly.

~Big-Bird~, TO GET THE, _i.e._, to be hissed, as actors occasionally are
by the “gods.” BIG-BIRD is simply a metaphor for goose.—_Theat. Slang._

~Big House~, or LARGE HOUSE, the workhouse,—a phrase used by the very
poor.

~Big-wig~, a person in authority or office. Exchangeable with “GREAT
GUN.”

~Bilbo~, a sword; abbrev. of “BILBAO blade.” Spanish swords were
anciently very celebrated, especially those of Toledo, Bilbao, &c.

~Bilk~, a cheat, or a swindler. Formerly in general use, now confined to
the streets, where it is common, and mostly used in reference to
prostitutes. _Gothic_, BILAICAN.

~Bilk~, to defraud, or obtain goods, &c., without paying for them; “to
BILK the schoolmaster,” to get information or experience without paying
for it.

~Billingsgate~ (when applied to speech), foul and coarse language. Many
years since people used to visit Thames Street to hear the Billingsgate
fishwomen abuse each other. The anecdote of Dr. Johnson and the
Billingsgate virago is well known.

~Billingsgate Pheasant~, a red herring or bloater. This is also called a
“two-eyed steak.”

~Billy~, a silk pocket-handkerchief.—_Scotch._—_See_ WIPE.

⁂ A list of slang terms descriptive of the various patterns of
handkerchiefs, pocket and neck, is here subjoined:—

    BELCHER, darkish blue ground, large round white spots, with a spot
    in the centre of darker blue than the ground. This was adopted by
    Jem Belcher, the pugilist, as his “colours,” and soon became popular
    amongst “the fancy.”

    BIRD’S-EYE WIPE, a handkerchief of any colour, containing white
    spots. The blue bird’s-eye is similar to the Belcher except in the
    centre. Sometimes a BIRD’S-EYE WIPE has a white ground and blue
    spots.

    BLOOD-RED FANCY, red.

    BLUE BILLY, blue ground, generally with white figures.

    CREAM FANCY, any pattern on a white ground.

    KING’S MAN, yellow pattern on a green ground.

    RANDAL’S MAN, green, with white spots; named after the favourite
    colours of Jack Randal, pugilist.

    WATER’S MAN, sky coloured.

    YELLOW FANCY, yellow, with white spots.

    YELLOW MAN, all yellow.

~Billy~, a policeman’s staff. Also stolen metal of any kind.
BILLY-HUNTING is buying old metal. A BILLY-FENCER is a marine-store
dealer.

~Billy-Barlow~, a street clown; sometimes termed a JIM CROW, or
SALTIMBANCO,—so called from the hero of a slang song. Billy was a real
person, semi-idiotic, and though in dirt and rags, fancied himself a
swell of the first water. Occasionally he came out with real witticisms.
He was a well-known street character about the East-end of London, and
died in Whitechapel Workhouse.

~Billy-Cock~, a soft felt hat of the Jim Crow or “wide-awake”
description.

~Bingo~, brandy.—_Old Cant._

~Bingy~, a term largely used in the butter trade to denote bad, ropy
butter; nearly equivalent to VINNIED.

~Bird-Cage~, a four-wheeled cab.

~Birthday Suit~, the suit in which Adam and Eve first saw each other,
and “were not ashamed.”

~Bishop~, a warm drink composed of materials similar to those used in
the manufacture of “flip” and “purl.”

~Bit~, fourpence; in America a 12-1/2 cent piece is called a BIT, and a
defaced 20 cent piece is termed a LONG BIT. A BIT is the smallest coin
in Jamaica, equal to 6d. BIT usually means the smallest silver coin in
circulation; also a piece of money of any kind. Charles Bannister, the
witty singer and actor, one day meeting a Bow Street runner with a man
in custody, asked what the prisoner had done; and being told that he had
stolen a bridle, and had been detected in the act of selling it, said,
“Ah, then, he wanted to touch the BIT.”

~Bitch~, tea; “a BITCH party,” a tea-drinking. Probably because
undergraduates consider tea only fit for old women.—_Oxford._

~Bite~, a cheat; “a Yorkshire BITE,” a cheating fellow from that county.
The term BITE is also applied to a hard bargainer.—_North_; also _old
slang_—used by _Pope_. Swift says it originated with a nobleman in his
day.

~Bite~, to cheat; “to be BITTEN,” to be taken in or imposed upon.
Originally a Gipsy term. CROSS-BITER, for a cheat, continually
occurs in writers of the sixteenth century. Bailey has CROSS-BITE, a
disappointment, probably the primary sense; and BITE is very probably a
contraction of this.

~Bit-Faker~, or TURNER OUT, a coiner of bad money.

~Bit-of-Stuff~, overdressed man; a man with full confidence in his
appearance and abilities; a young woman, who is also called a BIT OF
MUSLIN.

~Bitter~, diminutive of bitter beer; “to do a BITTER,” to drink
beer.—Originally _Oxford_, but now general.

~Bittock~, a distance of very undecided length. If a North countryman be
asked the distance to a place, he will most probably reply, “a mile and
a BITTOCK.” The latter may be considered any distance from one hundred
yards to ten miles.

~Bivvy~, or GATTER, beer; “shant of BIVVY,” a pot or quart of beer. In
Suffolk the afternoon refreshment of reapers is called BEVER. It is also
an old English term.

    “He is none of those same ordinary eaters, that will devour three
    breakfasts, and as many dinners, without any prejudice to their
    BEVERS, drinkings, or suppers.”—_Beaumont and Fletcher’s Woman
    Hater_, i. 3.

Both words are probably from the _Italian_, BEVERE, BERE. _Latin_,
BIBERE. _English_, BEVERAGE.

~Biz~, contraction of the word business; a phrase much used in America
in writing as well as in conversation.

~B. K. S.~ Military officers in _mufti_, when out on a spree, and not
wishing their profession to be known, speak of their barracks as the
B. K. S.

~Black and White~, handwriting or print. “Let’s have it in BLACK AND
WHITE,” is often said with regard to an agreement when it is to the
advantage of one or both that it should be written.

~Black-a-vised~, having a very dark complexion.

~Blackberry-Swagger~, a person who hawks tapes, boot-laces, &c.

~Blackbirding~, slave-catching. Term most applied nowadays to the
Polynesian coolie traffic.

~Black Diamonds~, coals; talented persons of dingy or unpolished
exterior; rough jewels.

~Blackguard~, a low or dirty fellow; a rough or a hulking fellow,
capable of any meanness or cowardice.

    “A cant word amongst the vulgar, by which is implied a dirty fellow
    of the meanest kind, Dr. Johnson says, and he cites only the modern
    authority of Swift. But the introduction of this word into our
    language belongs not to the vulgar, and is more than a century prior
    to the time of Swift. Mr. Malone agrees with me in exhibiting the
    two first of the following examples:—The _black-guard_ is evidently
    designed to imply a fit attendant on the devil. Mr. Gifford,
    however, in his late edition of Ben Jonson’s works, assigns an
    origin of the name different from what the old examples which I have
    cited seem to countenance. It has been formed, he says, from those
    ‘mean and dirty dependants, in great houses, who were selected to
    carry coals to the kitchen, halls, &c. To this smutty regiment, who
    attended the progresses, and rode in the carts with the pots and
    kettles, which, with every other article of furniture, were then
    moved from palace to palace, the people, in derision, gave the name
    of _black guards_; a term since become sufficiently familiar, and
    never properly explained.’”—_Todd’s Johnson’s Dictionary._

Blackguard as an adjective is very powerful.

~Blackleg~, a rascal, swindler, or card cheat. The derivation of this
term was solemnly argued before the full Court of Queen’s Bench upon a
motion for a new trial for libel, but was not decided by the learned
tribunal. Probably it is from the custom of sporting and turf men
wearing black _top-boots_. Hence BLACKLEG came to be the phrase for a
professional sporting man, and thence for a professional sporting cheat.
The word is now in its worst sense diminished to “leg.”

~Black Maria~, the sombre van in which prisoners are conveyed from the
police court to prison.

~Black Monday~, the Monday on which boys return to school after the
holidays. Also a low term for the Monday on which an execution took
place.

~Black Sheep~, a “bad lot,” “_mauvais sujet_;” sometimes “scabby sheep;”
also a workman who refuses to join in a strike.

~Black Strap~, port wine; especially that which is thick and sweet.

~Blackwork~, undertaking. The waiters met at public dinners are often
employed during the day as mutes, etc. Omnibus and cab drivers regard
BLACKWORK as a _dernier ressort_.

~Bladder-of-Lard~, a coarse, satirical nickname for a bald-headed
person. From similarity of appearance.

~Blade~, a man—in ancient times the term for a soldier; “knowing
BLADE,” a wide-awake, sharp, or cunning man.

~Blarney~, flattery, powers of persuasion. A castle in the county of
Cork. It is said that whoever kisses a certain stone in this castle will
be able to persuade others of whatever he or she pleases. The name of
the castle is derived from BLADH, a blossom, _i.e._, the flowery or
fertile demesne. BLADH is also flattery; hence the connexion. A more
than ordinarily persuasive Irishman is said to have “kissed the BLARNEY
stone.”

~Blast~, to curse. Originally a _Military_ expression.

~Blaze~, to leave trace purposely of one’s way in a forest or unknown
path by marking trees or other objects.

~Blazes~, a low synonym for the infernal regions, and now almost for
anything. “Like BLAZES” is a phrase of intensification applied without
any reference to the original meaning. Also applied to the brilliant
habiliments of flunkeys, since the episode of Sam Weller and the
“swarry.”

~Bleed~, to victimize, or extract money from a person, to sponge on, to
make suffer vindictively.

~Blest~, a vow; “BLEST if I’ll do it,” _i.e._, I am determined not to do
it; euphemism for CURST.

~Blether~, to bother, to annoy, to pester. “A BLETHERING old nuisance”
is a common expression for a garrulous old person.

~Blew~, or BLOW, to inform, or peach, to lose or spend money.

~Blewed~, a man who has lost or spent all his money is said to have
BLEWED it. Also used in cases of robbery from the person, as, “He’s
BLEWED his red ’un,” _i.e._, he’s been eased of his watch.

~Blewed~, got rid of, disposed of, spent.

~Blind~, a pretence, or make-believe.

~Blind-Half-Hundred~, the Fiftieth Regiment of Foot; so called through
their great sufferings from ophthalmia when serving in Egypt.

~Blind-Hookey~, a game at cards which has no recommendation beyond the
rapidity with which money can be won and lost at it; called also WILFUL
MURDER.

~Blind-Man’s-Holiday~, night, darkness. Sometimes applied to the period
“between the lights.”

~Blind Monkeys~, an imaginary collection at the Zoological Gardens,
which are supposed to receive care and attention from persons fitted by
nature for such office and for little else. An idle and useless person
is often told that he is only fit to lead the BLIND MONKEYS to evacuate.
Another form this elegant conversation takes, is for one man to tell
another that he knows of a suitable situation for him. “How much a week?
and what to do?” are natural questions, and then comes the scathing and
sarcastic reply, “Five bob a week at the doctor’s—you’re to stand
behind the door and make the patients sick. They wont want no physic
when they sees your mug.”

~Blinker~, a blackened eye.—_Norwich._ Also a hard blow in the eye.
BLINKERS, spectacles.

~Blink-Fencer~, a person who sells spectacles.

~Bloated Aristocrat~, a street term for any decently dressed person.
From the persistent abuse lavished on a “bloated and parasitical
aristocracy” by Hyde Park demagogues and a certain unpleasant portion of
the weekly press.

~Bloater.~—_See_ MILD.

~Blob~ (from BLAB), to talk. Beggars are of two kinds—those who SCREEVE
(introducing themselves with a FAKEMENT, or false document) and those
who BLOB, or state their case in their own truly “unvarnished” language.

~Block~, the head. “To BLOCK a hat,” is to knock a man’s hat down over
his eyes.—_See_ BONNET. Also a street obstruction.

~Block Ornaments~, the small dark-coloured and sometimes stinking pieces
of meat which used to be exposed on the cheap butchers’ blocks or
counters; matters of interest to all the sharp-visaged women in poor
neighbourhoods. Since the great rise in the price of meat there has been
little necessity for butchers to make block ornaments of their odds and
ends. They are bespoke beforehand.

~Bloke~, a man; “the BLOKE with the jasey,” the man with the wig,
_i.e._, the Judge. _Gipsy_ and _Hindoo_, LOKE. _North_, BLOACHER, any
large animal.

~Blood~, a fast or high-mettled man. Nearly obsolete, but much used in
George the Fourth’s time.

~Blood-money~, the money that used to be paid to any one who by
information or evidence led to a conviction for a capital offence.
Nowadays applied to all sums received by informers.

~Blood-Red Fancy~, a particular kind of handkerchief sometimes worn by
pugilists and frequenters of prize fights.—_See_ BILLY and COLOUR.

~Bloody~, an expletive used, without reference to meaning, as an
adjective and an adverb, simply for intensification.

~Bloody Jemmy~, an uncooked sheep’s head.—_See_ SANGUINARY JAMES. Also
MOUNTAIN PECKER.

~Blow~, to expose, or inform; “BLOW the gaff,” to inform against a
person.

    “‘As for that,’ says Will, ‘I could tell it well enough, if I had
    it, but I must not be seen anywhere among my old acquaintances, for
    I am BLOWN, and they will all betray me.’”—_History of Colonel
    Jack_, 1723.

The expression would seem to have arisen from the belief that a flower
might be blighted if “BLOWN upon” by a foul wind or a corrupted breath.
See the condition of the flowers on a dinner-table by the time the
company rise. In _America_, “to BLOW” is slang for to lie in a boasting
manner, to brag or “gas” unduly.

~Blow a Cloud~, to smoke a cigar or pipe—a phrase used two centuries
ago. Most likely in use as long as tobacco here—an almost evident
conclusion.

~Blow Me~, or BLOW ME TIGHT, a vow, a ridiculous and unmeaning
ejaculation, inferring an appeal to the ejaculator; “I’m BLOWED if you
will” is a common expression among the lower orders; “BLOW ME UP” was
the term a century ago.—_See Parker’s Adventures_, 1781.—The
expression BE-BLOWED is now more general. Thomas Hood used to tell a
story:—

    “I was once asked to contribute to a new journal, not exactly
    gratuitously, but at a very small advance upon nothing—and avowedly
    because the work had been planned according to that estimate.
    However, I accepted the terms conditionally—that is to say,
    provided the principle could be properly carried out. Accordingly, I
    wrote to my butcher, baker, and other tradesmen, informing them that
    it was necessary, for the sake of cheap literature and the interest
    of the reading public, that they should furnish me with their
    several commodities at a very trifling per-centage above cost price.
    It will be sufficient to quote the answer of the
    butcher:—‘Sir,—Respectin’ your note, Cheap literater BE BLOWED!
    Butchers must live as well as other pepel—and if so be you or the
    readin’ publick wants to have meat at prime cost, you must buy your
    own beastesses, and kill yourselves.—I remane, etc.

    “‘JOHN STOKES.’”

~Blow Out~, or TUCK IN, a feast. Sometimes the expression is, “BLOW OUT
your bags.” A BLOW OUT is often called a tightener.

~Blow Up~, to make a noise, or scold; formerly a cant expression used
among thieves, now a recognised and respectable phrase. BLOWING UP, a
jobation, a scolding.

~Blowen~, originally a showy or flaunting female, now a prostitute only.
In _Wilts_, a BLOWEN is a blossom. _Germ._ BLÜHEN, to bloom. In
_German_, also, BUHLEN is to court, and BUHLE, a sweetheart.

    “O du _blühende_ Mädchen, viel schöne Willkomm!”—_German Song._

Possibly, however, the street term BLOWEN may mean one whose reputation
has been BLOWN UPON or damaged.

~Blower~, a girl; a contemptuous name in opposition to JOMER.—_Gipsy._

~Blowsey~, a word applied to a rough wench, or coarse woman.

~Bludger~, a low thief, who does not hesitate to use violence, literally
one who will use a bludgeon.

~Blue~, said of talk that is smutty or indecent. Probably from the
French, “Bibliothèque Bleu.” When the conversation has assumed an
entirely opposite character, it is then said to be BROWN or Quakerish.

~Blue~, a policeman; otherwise BLUE BOTTLE. From the colour of his
uniform.

~Blue~, or BLEW, to pawn or pledge. Actually to get rid of.

~Blue~, confounded or surprised; “to look BLUE,” to look astonished,
annoyed, or disappointed.

~Blue Bellies~, a term applied by the Confederate soldiers during the
civil war in America to the Federals, the name being suggested by the
skyblue gaberdines worn by the Northern soldiers. On the other hand, the
“filthy BLUE BELLIES,” as the full title ran, dubbed the Confederates
“Greybacks,” the epithet cutting both ways, as the Southern soldiers not
only wore grey uniforms, but “greyback” is American as well as English
for a louse.

~Blue Billy~, the handkerchief (blue ground with white spots) sometimes
worn and used as a colour at prize-fights. Also, the refuse ammoniacal
lime from gas factories.

~Blue Blanket~, a rough overcoat made of coarse pilot cloth.

~Blue Bottle~, a policeman. This well-known slang term for a London
constable is used by _Shakspeare_. In Part ii. of _King Henry IV._, act
v. scene 4, Doll Tearsheet calls the beadle, who is dragging her in, a
“thin man in a censer, a BLUE-BOTTLE rogue.” This may at first seem
singular, but the reason is obvious. The beadles of Bridewell whose duty
it was to whip the women prisoners were clad in blue.

~Blue Butter~, mercurial ointment used for the destruction of parasites.

~Blued~, or BLEWED, tipsy, or drunk. Now given way to SLEWED.

~Blue Devils~, the apparitions supposed to be seen by habitual
drunkards. Form of _del. trem._

~Blue Moon~, an unlimited period. “Once in a blue moon.”

~Blue Murders.~ Probably from desperate or alarming cries. A term used
more to describe cries of terror or alarm than for any other purpose.
As, “I heard her calling BLUE MURDERS.”—MORBLEU.

~Blue-Pigeon-Flyer~, sometimes a journeyman plumber, glazier, or other
workman, who, when repairing houses, strips off the lead, and makes away
with it. This performance is, though, by no means confined to workmen.
An empty house is often entered and the whole of the roof in its
vicinity stripped, the only notice given to the folks below being
received by them on the occasion of a heavy downfall of rain. The term
FLYER has, indeed, of late years been more peculiarly applied to the man
who steals the lead in pursuance of his vocation as a thief, than to him
who takes it because it comes in the way of his work.

~Blue Ruin~, gin.

~Blues~, a fit of despondency.—_See_ BLUE DEVILS.

~Blues~, the police. Sometimes called the Royal Regiment of Foot-guards
BLUE.

~Bluey~, lead.—German, BLEI. Most likely, though, from the colour, as
the term is of the very lowest slang.

~Bluff~, an excuse; also the game at cards known as euchre in America.

~Bluff~, to turn aside, stop, or excuse.

~Blunt~, money. It has been said that this term is from the _French_
BLOND, sandy or golden colour, and that a parallel may be found in BROWN
or BROWNS, the slang for half-pence. Far-fetched as this etymology
seems, it may be correct, as it is borne out by the analogy of similar
expressions. Cf. BLANQUILLO, a word used in Morocco and Southern Spain
for a small Moorish coin. The “asper” (ἄσπρον) of Constantinople is
called by the Turks AKCHEH, _i.e._, “little white.”

~Blurt Out~, to speak from impulse, and without reflection, to let out
suddenly.—_Shakspeare._

~B.N.C.~, for Brasenose, initials of Brazen Nose College. In spite of
the nose over the gate the probability is the real name was Brasinium.
It is still famous for its beer.—_University._

~Board-of-Green-Cloth~, a facetious synonym for a card or billiard
table.

~Boat~, originally to transport; the term is now applied to penal
servitude. To “get the BOAT,” or to “be BOATED,” is to be sentenced to a
long term of imprisonment equivalent to transportation under the old
system.

~Bob~, a shilling. Formerly BOBSTICK, which may have been the original.
BOB-A-NOB, a shilling a-head.

~Bob~, “s’help me BOB,” a street oath, equivalent to “so help me God.”
Other words are used in street language for a similarly evasive purpose,
_i.e._, CAT, GREENS, TATUR, &c., all equally ridiculous. Ignorant people
have a singular habit of saying “so help _my_,” instead of “_me_,”
whatever the following words may be. This shows how little they think of
the meanings of the phrases most in use among them. The words “so help”
are almost invariably pronounced “swelp.”

~Bobbery~, a squabble, tumult.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Bobbish~, very well, clever, spruce. “How are you doing?” “Oh! pretty
BOBBISH.”—_Old._

~Bobby~, a policeman: both BOBBY and PEELER were nicknames given to the
new police, in allusion to the Christian name and surname of the late
_Sir Robert Peel_, who was the prime mover in effecting their
introduction and improvement. The term BOBBY is, however, older than the
introduction of the new police. The official square-keeper, who is
always armed with a cane to drive away idle and disorderly urchins, has,
time out of mind, been called by the said urchins, “BOBBY the beadle.”

~Bodkin~, any one sitting between two others in a carriage, is said “to
ride BODKIN.” Amongst sporting men, applied to a person who takes his
turn between the sheets on alternate nights, when the hotel has twice as
many visitors as it can comfortably lodge; as, for instance, during a
race-week.

~Body-Snatcher~, a bailiff or runner: SNATCH, the trick by which the
bailiff captures the delinquent. These terms are now almost obsolete, so
far as the pursuits mentioned are concerned.

~Bog~, or BOG-HOUSE, a privy, as distinguished from a water-closet.
Originally printers’ slang, but now very common, and not applied to any
particular form of _cabinet d’aisance_. “To BOG” is to ease oneself by
evacuation.

~Bog-Oranges~, potatoes. A phrase perhaps derived from the term “Irish
fruit,” which, by some strange peculiarity has been applied to potatoes;
for even the most ignorant Cockney could hardly believe that potatoes
grow in a bog. As, however, the majority of the lower classes of London
do believe that potatoes were indigenous to, and were first brought from
the soil of Ireland, which is also in some parts supposed to be capable
of growing nothing else, they may even believe that potatoes are
actually BOG-ORANGES.

~Bog-Trotter~, satirical name for an Irishman.—_Miege._ _Camden_,
however, speaking of the “debateable land” on the borders of England and
Scotland, says, “both these dales breed notable BOG-TROTTERS.”

~Bogus~, an American term for anything pretending to be that which it is
not—such as BOGUS degrees, BOGUS titles, &c.

~Boilers~, or BROMPTON BOILERS, a name originally given to the New
Kensington Museum and School of Art, in allusion to the peculiar form of
the buildings, and the fact of their being mainly composed of, and
covered with, sheet iron. This has been changed since the extensive
alterations in the building, or rather pile of buildings, and the words
are now the property of the Bethnal Green Museum.—_See_ PEPPER-BOXES.

~Boko~, the nose. Originally pugilistic slang, but now general.

~Bolt~, to run away, decamp, or abscond. Also to swallow without
chewing. To eat greedily.

~Bolus~, an apothecary. Origin evident.

~Bombay Ducks;~ in the East India Company’s army the Bombay regiments
were so designated. The name is now given to a dried fish (_bummelow_),
much eaten by natives and Europeans in Western India.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Bone~, to steal or appropriate what does not belong to you. BONED,
seized, apprehended.—_Old._

~Bone~, good, excellent. ◇, the vagabonds’ hieroglyphic for BONE, or
good, chalked by them on houses and street corners as a hint to
succeeding beggars.—_French_, BON.

~Bone-Grubber~, a person who hunts dust-holes, gutters, and all likely
spots for refuse bones, which he sells at the rag-shops, or to the
bone-grinders. The term was also applied to a resurrectionist. Cobbett
was therefore called “a BONE GRUBBER,” because he brought the remains of
Tom Paine from America.

~Bone-Picker~, a footman.

~Bones~, to rattle the BONES, to play at dice: also called St. Hugh’s
BONES.

~Bones~, “he made no BONES of it,” he did not hesitate, _i.e._,
undertook and finished the work without difficulty, “found no BONES in
the jelly.”—_Ancient, vide Cotgrave._

~Boniface~, landlord of a tavern or inn.

~Bonnet~, or BONNETER, a gambling cheat. Sometimes called a “bearer-up.”
The BONNET plays as though he were a member of the general public, and
by his good luck, or by the force of his example, induces others to
venture their stakes. Bonneting is often done in much better society
than that to be found in the ordinary gaming rooms. A man who persuades
another to buy an article on which he receives commission or per-centage
is said to BONNET or bear-up for the seller. Also, a pretence, or
make-believe, a sham bidder at auctions, one who metaphorically blinds
or BONNETS others.

~Bonnet~, to strike a man’s cap or hat over his eyes. Also to “bear-up”
for another.

~Booby-Trap~, a favourite amusement of boys at school. It consists in
placing a pitcher of water on the top of a door set ajar for the
purpose; the person whom they wish to drench is then made to pass
through the door, and receives the pitcher and its contents on his
unlucky head. Books are sometimes used.

~Book~, an arrangement of bets against certain horses marked in a
pocket-book made for that purpose. “Making a BOOK upon it,” is a common
phrase to denote that a man is prepared to lay the odds against the
horses in a race. “That does not suit my BOOK,” _i.e._, does not accord
with my other arrangements. The principle of making a BOOK, or betting
round, as it is sometimes termed, is to lay a previously-determined sum
against every horse in the race, or as many horses as possible; and
should the bookmaker “get round,” _i.e._, succeed in laying against as
many horses as will more than balance the odds laid, he is certain to be
a winner. The BOOKMAKER is distinguished from the backer by its being
his particular business to bet against horses, or to lay, while the
backer, who is also often a professional gambler, stands by the chance
of a horse, or the chances of a set of horses about which he supposes
himself to be possessed of special information. A bookmaker rarely backs
horses for his own particular fancy—he may indeed put a sovereign or a
fiver on an animal about which he has been told something, but as a rule
if he specially fancies a horse, the bookmaker lets him “run for the
BOOK,” _i.e._, does not lay against him. When a bookmaker backs a horse
in the course of his regular business, it is because he has laid too
much against him, and finds it convenient to share the danger with other
bookmakers.

~Booked~, caught, fixed, disposed of.—Term in _Book-keeping_.

~Bookmaker’s Pocket~, a breast-pocket made inside the waistcoat, for
notes of large amount.

~Books~, a pack of cards. Term used by professional card-players.—_See_
DEVIL’S BOOKS.

~Boom~, “to top one’s BOOM off,” to be off or start in a certain
direction.—_Sea._

~Boom-Passenger~, a sailor’s slang term for a convict on board ship.
Derived from the circumstance that prisoners on board convict ships were
chained to, or were made to crawl along or stand on the booms for
exercise or punishment.

~Boon-Companion~, a comrade in a drinking bout. BOON evidently
corruption of BON.

~Booze~, drink. _Ancient Cant_, BOWSE. BOOZE, or SUCK-CASA, a
public-house.

~Booze~, to drink, or more properly, to use another slang term, to
“lush,” viz., to drink continually, until drunk, or nearly so. The term
is an old one. _Harman_, in Queen Elizabeth’s days, speaks of “BOUSING
(or boozing) and belly-cheere.” _Massinger_ also speaks of BOUSE. The
term was good English in the fourteenth century, and came from the
_Dutch_, BUYZEN, to tipple.

~Boozing-Ken~, a beer-shop, a low public-house.—_Ancient._

~Boozy~, intoxicated or fuddled.

~Bore~, a troublesome friend or acquaintance, perhaps so called from his
unvaried and pertinacious pushing; a nuisance; anything which wearies or
annoys. The _Gradus ad Cantabrigiam_ suggests the derivation of BORE
from the _Greek_ Βάρος, a burden. _Shakspeare_ uses it, _King Henry
VIII._, i. 1—

            “----at this instant
    He BORES me with some trick.”

_Grose_ speaks of this word as being much in fashion about the year
1780-81, and states that it vanished of a sudden without leaving a trace
behind. That this was not so, the constant use of the word nowadays will
prove. The late Prince Consort spoke as follows on the subject of BORES
in his address to the British Association, at Aberdeen, September 14,
1859—

    “I will not weary you by further examples, with which most of you
    are better acquainted than I am myself, but merely express my
    satisfaction that there should exist bodies of men who will bring
    the well-considered and understood wants of science before the
    public and the Government, who will even hand round the begging-box,
    and expose themselves to refusals and rebuffs, to which all beggars
    are liable, with the certainty besides of being considered great
    BORES. Please to recollect that this species of BORE is a most
    useful animal, well adapted for the ends for which nature intended
    him. He alone, by constantly returning to the charge, and repeating
    the same truths and the same requests, succeeds in awakening
    attention to the cause which he advocates, and obtains that hearing
    which is granted him at last for self-protection, as the minor evil
    compared to his importunity, but which is requisite to make his
    cause understood.”

~Bore~ (_Pugilistic_), to press a man to the ropes of the ring by
superior weight. In the world of athletics to BORE is to push an
opponent out of his course. This is a most heinous crime among rowers,
as it very often prevents a man having the full use of the tide, or
compels him to foul, in which case the decision of the race is left to
individual judgment, at times, of necessity, erroneous.

~Bosh~, nonsense, stupidity.—_Gipsy_ and _Persian_. Also pure
_Turkish_, BOSH LAKERDI, empty talk. The term was used in this country
as early as 1760, and may be found in the _Student_, vol. ii. p. 217. It
has been suggested, with what reason the reader must judge for himself,
that this colloquial expression is from the _German_ BOSH, or BOSSCH,
answering to our word “swipes.”

~Bosh~, a fiddle. This is a _Gipsy_ term, and so the exclamations
“Bosh!” and “Fiddle-de-dee!” may have some remote connexion.

~Bosh-Faker~, a violin player. Term principally used by itinerants.

~Bos-Ken~, a farmhouse. _Ancient._—_See_ KEN.

~Bosky~, inebriated. Not much in use now.

~Bosman~, a farmer: “faking a BOSMAN on the main toby,” robbing a farmer
on the highway. BOSS, a master.—_American._ Both terms from the
_Dutch_, BOSCH-MAN, one who lives in the woods; otherwise _Boschjeman_,
or _Bushman_.

~Boss-Eyed~, said of a person with one eye, or rather with one eye
injured, a person with an obliquity of vision. In this sense sometimes
varied by the term “swivel-eyed.”

~Bostruchyzer~, a small kind of comb for curling the whiskers.—_Oxford
University._

~Botany Bay~, Worcester Coll. Oxon., so called from its remote
situation.

~Bother~, trouble or annoyance. Any one oppressed with business cares is
said to be BOTHERED. “Don’t BOTHER,” is a common expression. BLOTHER, an
old word, signifying to chatter idly.

~Botheration!~ trouble, annoyance; “BOTHERATION to it!” “confound it!”
or “deuce take it!”—an exclamation when irritated.

~Bottle-Holder~, originally a term in prize ring parlance for the second
who took charge of the water-bottle, which was an essential feature in
all pugilistic arrangements. This second used to hold the combatant on
his knee between the rounds, while the other or principal second
sponged, instructed, and advised; an abettor; also the bridegroom’s man
at a wedding. Slang term for Lord Palmerston, derived from a speech he
made some years ago when foreign secretary, in which he described
himself as acting the part of a judicious BOTTLE-HOLDER among the
foreign powers.

~Bottom~, stamina in a horse or man. Power to stand fatigue; endurance
to receive a good beating and still fight on. “A fellow of pluck, sound
wind, and good BOTTOM is fit to fight anything.” This was an old axiom
among prize fighters. Pierce Egan was very fond of the word.

~Bottom~, spirit placed in a glass before aërated water is poured in.
As, “a soda and a BOTTOM of brandy,” “soda and dark BOTTOM,” is American
for soda and brown brandy.

    “BOTTOMED well with brandy.”—_Bon Gaultier Ballads._

~Botts~, the colic or bellyache.—_Stable Slang._ _Burns_ uses it. _See
Death and Dr. Hornbook._

~Botty~, conceited, swaggering.—_Stable._ An infant’s
posteriors.—_Nursery._

~Bounce~, impudence, cheek. A showy swindler, a bully.

~Bounce~, to boast, cheat, or bully.—_Old Cant._ Also to lie.

~Bounceable~, prone to bouncing or boasting.

~Bouncer~, a person who steals whilst bargaining with a tradesman, a
swindler, or a lie of more than ordinary dimensions.

~Bounder~, a four-wheeled cab. Because of its jumping motion over the
stones. Also a University term for a TRAP, which generally has a very
rough time of it on the country roads.

~Bow-Catcher~, or KISS-CURL, a small curl which a few years back used to
be, and probably will be again some day, twisted on the cheeks or
temples of young—and often old—girls, adhering to the face as if
gummed or pasted. Evidently a corruption of BEAU-CATCHER. In old times
this was called a lovelock, when it was the mark at which all the
Puritan and ranting preachers levelled their pulpit pop-guns, loaded
with sharp and virulent abuse. Hall and Prynne looked upon all women as
strumpets who dared to let the hair depart from a straight line
upon their cheeks. The French prettily termed these adornments
_accroche-cœurs_, whilst in the United States they were plainly and
unpleasantly called “spit-curls.” Bartlett says: “Spit-curl, a detached
lock of hair curled upon the temple; probably from having been at first
plastered into shape by the saliva.” It is now understood that the
mucilage of quince seed is used by the ladies for this purpose. When men
twist the hair on each side of their faces into ropes they are sometimes
called “bell-ropes,” as being wherewith to _draw the belles_. Whether
BELL-ROPES or BOW-CATCHERS, it is singular they should form part of a
prisoner’s adornment, and that a jaunty little kiss-curl should, of all
things in the world, ornament a jail dock; yet such was formerly the
case. Hunt, “the accomplice after the fact and King’s evidence against”
the murderer of Weare, on his trial appeared at the bar with a highly
pomatumed love-lock sticking tight to his forehead. In the days of the
Civil Wars, the very last thing a Cavalier would part with was his
love-lock.

~Bowdlerization~, a term used in literary circles to signify undue
strictness of treatment caused by over-modesty in editing a classic. To
BOWDLERIZE is to emasculate through squeamishness. From the name
(Bowdler) of one of Shakspeare’s “purifiers.”

~Bowlas~, round tarts made of sugar, apple, and bread, sold in the
streets, especially at the East-end of London.

~Bowles~, shoes.

~Bowl Out~, to put out of the game, to remove out of one’s way, to
detect.—Originally a _Cricketing term_, but now general.

~Box-Harry~, a term with bagmen or commercial travellers, implying
dinner and tea at one meal; also dining with “Duke Humphrey,” _i.e._,
going without—which _see_.

~Box the Compass~, to repeat the thirty-two points of the compass either
in succession or irregularly. The method used at sea to teach boys the
points of the mariner’s compass.—_Sea._

~Boy~, a hump on a man’s back. In low circles it is usual to speak of a
humpbacked man as two persons—“him and his BOY,” and from this much
coarse fun and personality are at times evolved.

~Bracelets~, handcuffs.

~Brace up~, to pawn stolen goods.

~Brads~, money. Properly a small kind of nails used by
cobblers.—_Compare_ HORSE NAILS.

~Brain-Pan~, the skull, and BRAIN-CANISTER, the head. Both pugilistic
and exchangeable terms.

~Bramble-Gelder~, a derisive appellation for an
agriculturist.—_Suffolk._

~Brandy Pawnee~, brandy and water.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Brandy Smash~, one of the 365 American drinks, made of brandy and
crushed ice.

~Bran-New~, quite new. Properly _Brent_, BRAND or _Fire new_, _i.e._,
fresh from the anvil, or fresh with the manufacturer’s brand upon it.

~Brass~, money. “Tin” is also used, and so are most forms of metal.

~Brass~, impudence. In 1803 some artillerymen stationed at Norwich were
directed to prove some brass ordnance belonging to the city. To the
report delivered to the corporation was appended this note:—“_N.B._—It
is customary for the corporal to have the old metal when any of the
pieces burst.” _Answer._—“The corporation is of opinion that the
corporal does not want BRASS.”

~Brass-Knocker~, broken victuals. Used by tramps and cadgers.

~Brat~, a child of either sex. Generally used in an offensive sense.

~Brazen-Faced~, impudent, shameless. From BRASS. Such a person is
sometimes said “to have rubbed his face with a brass candlestick.”

~Brazil~, a hard red wood; “HARD AS BRAZIL,” a common expression.
_Quarles_ in his _Emblems_ says—

    “Thou know’st my brittle temper’s prone to break.
    Are my bones BRAZIL or my flesh of oak?”

~Bread-Bags~, a nickname given in the army and navy to any one connected
with the victualling department, as a purser or purveyor in the
Commissariat.

~Bread Basket~, DUMPLING-DEPOT, VICTUALLING-OFFICE, &c., were terms
which in the old pugilistic days were given by the “Fancy” to the
digestive organs. Blows in this region were called “porridge
disturbers,” and other fancy names, which were supposed to rob them of
their hardness—to those who did not receive them.

~Break-Down~, a noisy dance, almost violent enough to break the floor
down; a jovial, social gathering, a “flare up;” in Ireland, a
wedding—_American_ so far as the dance is concerned.

~Break One’s Back~, a figurative expression, implying bankruptcy, or the
crippling of a person’s means.

    “A story is current of a fashionable author answering a late and
    rather violent knock at his door one evening. A coal-heaver wanted
    to know if the gentleman would like a cheap ton of coals; he was
    sorry for troubling him so late, but ‘the party as had a-ordered the
    two ton and a-half couldn’t be found,’ although he had driven his
    ‘waggon for six blessed hours up and down the neighbourhood.
    Five-and-twenty is the price, but yer shall have them for 20s.’ Our
    author was not to be tempted, he had heard of the trick before; so
    bidding the man go away from his house, he shut the door. The man,
    however, lingered there, expatiating on the quality of his
    coals—‘Acterly givin’ ’em away, and the gent wont have ’em,’ said
    he, addressing the neighbourhood in a loud voice: and the last that
    was heard of him was his anything but sweet voice whistling through
    the keyhole, ‘Will eighteen _bob_ BREAK YER BACK?’”

~Break Shins~, to borrow money. Probably from an older slang phrase,
“kick,” to ask for drink-money.

~Break the Ice~, to make a commencement, to plunge _in medias res_.

~Break Up~, the conclusion of a performance of any kind—originally a
school term.

~Breaky-Leg~, strong drink; “he’s been to Bungay fair, and broke both
his legs,” _i.e._, got drunk. In the ancient Egyptian language the
determinative character in the hieroglyphic verb “to be drank,” has the
significant form of the leg of a man being amputated. “Tangle Leg” is
the name given to New England rum.

[Illustration]

~Breeched~, or TO HAVE THE BAGS OFF, to have plenty of money; “to be
well BREECHED,” to be in good circumstances. Also among schoolboys to be
well flogged.

~Breeches~, “to wear the BREECHES,” said of a wife who usurps the
husband’s prerogative. Equivalent to the remark that “the grey mare is
the better horse.”

~Breeching~, a flogging. Term in use among boys at several private
schools.

~Breef~, probably identical with BRIEF, a shortened card used for
cheating purposes; thus described in an old book of games of about
1720—

    “Take a pack of cards and open them, then take out all the honours
    ... and cut a little from the edges of the rest all alike, so as to
    make the honours broader than the rest, so that when your adversary
    cuts to you, you are certain of an honour. When you cut to your
    adversary cut at the ends, and then it is a chance if you cut him an
    honour, because the cards at the ends are all of a length. Thus you
    may make breefs end-ways as well as sideways.”

Modern card-players of a certain kind have considerably improved on
this.

~Breeks~, breeches.—_Scotch_, now common.

~Brick~, a “jolly good fellow;” “a regular BRICK,” a staunch fellow.
About the highest compliment that in one word can be paid one man. Said
to be derived from an expression of Aristotle’s—τετραγωνος ἀνηρ.

~Bridge~, a cheating trick at cards, by which any particular card is cut
by previously curving it by the pressure of the hand. Used in France as
well as in England, and termed in the _Parisian Argot_ FAIRE LE PONT.

~Brief~, a pawnbroker’s duplicate; a raffle card, or a ticket of any
kind.

~Briefs~, cards constructed on a cheating principle. See BRIDGE,
CONCAVES and CONVEXES, LONGS, and SHORTS, REFLECTORS, &c. From the
_German_, BRIEFE, which Baron Heinecken says was the name given to the
cards manufactured at Ulm. BRIEF is also the synonym for a card in the
German _Rothwälsch_ dialect, and BRIEFEN to play at cards. “Item—beware
of the Joners, (gamblers,) who practice Beseflery with the BRIEF,
(cheating at cards,) who deal falsely and cut one for the other, cheat
with Boglein and spies, pick one BRIEF from the ground, and another from
a cupboard,” &c.—_Liber Vagatorum_, ed. by Martin Luther, in 1529.
English translation, by J. C. Hotten, 1860, p. 47. _See_ BREEF.

~Brim~, a violent irascible woman, as inflammable and unpleasant as
brimstone, from which the word is contracted.

~Briney~, the sea. A “dip in the BRINEY” once a year is a great
attraction to Cockney excursionists. A story is told of one excursionist
saying to another, as they stripped in a double machine, “Why, ’Arry,
what dirty feet you’ve got!” “’Ave I; well yer see I wasn’t down last
year.”

~Bring-up~, or BRING-TO, to stop suddenly, as a team of horses or a
vessel. To BRING-UP also means to feed, clothe, and educate a child. To
BRING-UP by hand is to bring up a newly-born child or animal without
assistance from the natural fount.

~Brisket-Beater~, a Roman Catholic.

~Broad and Shallow~, an epithet applied to the so-called “Broad Church,”
in contradistinction to the “High” and “Low” Churches. _See_ HIGH and
DRY.

~Broad-Brim~, originally applied to a Quaker only, but now used in
reference to all quiet, sedate, respectable old men.

~Broad-Cooper~, a person employed by brewers to negotiate with
publicans.

~Broad-Faking~, playing at cards. Generally used to denote “work” of the
three-card and kindred descriptions.

~Broad-Fencer~, a “k’rect card” seller at races.

~Broads~, cards. BROADSMAN, a card-sharper. _See_ BROAD-FAKING.

~Broadway Swell~, a New York term for a great dandy, Broadway being the
principal promenade in the “Empire City.”

~Broady~, cloth. Evidently a corruption of broadcloth. BROADY workers
are men who go round selling vile shoddy stuff under the pretence that
it is excellent material, which has been “got on the cross,” _i.e._
stolen.

~Brolly~, an umbrella. Term used at both Oxford and Cambridge
Universities.

~Brosier~, a bankrupt.—_Cheshire._ BROSIER-MY-DAME, school term,
implying a clearing of the housekeeper’s larder of provisions, in
revenge for stinginess.—_Eton._

~Brother-Chip~, originally fellow carpenter. Almost general now as
brother tradesman of any kind. Also, BROTHER-WHIP, a fellow coachman;
and BROTHER-BLADE, of the same occupation or calling—originally a
fellow-soldier.

~Brother-Smut~, a term of familiarity. “Ditto, BROTHER SMUT,” _tu
quoque_.

~Broth of a Boy~, an Irish term for a jolly good fellow.

~Brown~, a halfpenny.—_See_ BLUNT.

~Brown~, “to do BROWN,” to do well or completely, “doing it BROWN,”
prolonging the frolic, or exceeding sober bounds; “done BROWN,” taken
in, deceived, or surprised.

~Brown Bess~, the old Government regulation musket; a musket with a
browned barrel; also BLACK BESS. A suggestion has been made that BESS
may be from the _German_ BUSCHE, or BOSCHE, a barrel. It is much more
likely, however, that the phrase is derived from the fact that “the
soldier is wedded to his weapon.”

~Brown-papermen~, low gamblers.

~Brown Study~, a reverie. Very common even in educated society, but
hardly admissible in writing, and therefore considered a vulgarism. It
is derived, by a writer in _Notes and Queries_, from BROW STUDY, and he
cites the old German BRAUN, or AUG-BRAUN, an eye-brow.—_Ben Jonson._

~Brown Talk~, conversation of an exceedingly proper character,
Quakerish. Compare BLUE.

~Brown to~, to understand, to comprehend.

~Bruiser~, a fighting man, a pugilist. _Shakspeare_ uses the word
BRUISING in a similar sense.

~Brum~, a counterfeit coin. _Nearly obsolete._ Corruption of
_Brummagem_, for meaning of which _see_ Introductory Chapter.

~Brush~, a fox’s tail, a house-painter. Also a scrimmage.

~Brush~, or BRUSH-OFF, to run away, or move on quickly.—_Old Cant._

~Bub~, drink of any kind.—_See_ GRUB. _Middleton_, the dramatist,
mentions BUBBER, a great drinker.

~Bub~, a teat, woman’s breast, plural BUBBIES; no doubt from BIBE. _See_
_ante_.

~Bubble~, to over-reach, deceive, to tempt by means of false
promises.—_Old._ (_Acta Regia_, ii. 248, 1726.)

~Bubble-and-Squeak~, a dish composed of pieces of cold roast or boiled
meat and greens, afterwards fried, which have thus first BUBBLED in the
_pot_, and then SQUEAKED or hissed in the _pan_.

~Bubble-Company~, a swindling association.

~Buckled~, to be married. Also to be taken in custody. Both uses of the
word common and exchangeable among the London lower classes.

~Bubbley-Jock~, a turkey, or silly boasting fellow; a prig.—_Scottish._
In the north of England the bird is called a BOBBLE-COCK. Both names, no
doubt, from its cry, which is supposed by imaginative persons to consist
of the two words exactly.

~Buck~, a gay or smart man; an unlicensed cabman; also a large marble
used by schoolboys.

~Buck~, sixpence. The word is rarely used by itself, but generally
denotes the sixpence attached to shillings in reference to cost, as,
“three and a BUCK,” three shillings and sixpence. Probably a corruption
of Fyebuck.

~Buckhorse~, a smart blow or box on the ear; derived from the name of a
celebrated “bruiser” of that name. Buckhorse was a man who either
possessed or professed insensibility to pain, and who would for a small
sum allow anyone to strike him with the utmost force on the side of the
face.

~Buckle~, to bend; “I can’t BUCKLE to that.” I don’t understand it; to
yield or give in to a person. _Shakspeare_ uses the word in the latter
sense, _Henry IV._, i. 1; and _Halliwell_ says that “the commentators do
not supply another example.”

~Buckle-Beggar~, a COUPLE-BEGGAR, which _see_.

~Buckle-to~, to bend to one’s work, to begin at once, and with great
energy—from buckling-to one’s armour before a combat, or fastening on a
bundle.

~Buckley~, “Who struck BUCKLEY?” a common phrase used to irritate
Irishmen. The story is that an Englishman having struck an Irishman
named Buckley, the latter made a great outcry, and one of his friends
rushed forth screaming, “Who struck Buckley?” “I did,” said the
Englishman, preparing for the apparently inevitable combat. “Then,” said
the ferocious Hibernian, after a careful investigation of the other’s
thews and sinews, “then, sarve him right.”

~Buckra~, a white man. The original of this term is a “flogging man,”
from the Hebrew, and the application of it to the whites by the West
Indian negroes is, therefore, rather interesting. They probably first
learned it from a missionary.

~Buckshish~, BUCKSHEESH or BACKSHEESH, a present of money. Over all
India, and the East generally, the natives lose no opportunity of asking
for BUCKSHISH. The usage is such a complete nuisance that the word is
sometimes answered by a blow; this is termed BAMBOO BUCKSHISH. BUCKSHISH
has taken up a very firm residence in Europe—may, in fact, on a much
larger scale than that of Asia, be said to have always had an existence
here. BUCKSHISH is a very important item in the revenues of officials
who hold positions of considerable importance, as well as in those of
their humbler brethren. During the recent visit of the Shah of Persia,
that potentate discovered that BUCKSHISH was by no means peculiar to the
East.

~Budge~, to move, to “make tracks.”

~Budge~, strong drink; BUDGY, drunk; BUDGING-KEN, a public-house; “cove
of the BUDGING-KEN,” the landlord. Probably a corruption of BOOZE.
Probably also, on the lucus a non lucendo principle, because its use
made one incapable of budging.

~Buff~, the bare skin; “stripped to the BUFF.”

~Buff~, to swear to, or accuse; generally used in reference to a
wrongful accusation, as, “Oh, BUFF it on to him.” _Old_ word for
boasting, 1582.

~Buffer~, a navy term for a boatswain’s mate, one of whose duties it
is—or was—to administer the “cat.”

~Buffer~, a familiar expression for a jolly acquaintance, probably from
the _French_ BOUFFARD, a fool or clown; a “jolly old BUFFER,” said of a
good-humoured or liberal old man. In 1737, a BUFFER was a “rogue that
killed good sound horses for the sake of their skins, by running a long
wire into them.”—_Bacchus and Venus._ The term was once applied to
those who took false oaths for a consideration; but though the word has
fallen into disuse there is no particular reason for imagining that the
practice has.

~Buffer~, a woman employed in a Sheffield warehouse to give the final
polish to goods previously to their being plated.

~Buffer~, a dog. Dogs’ skins were formerly in great request—hence the
term BUFF, meaning in old English _to skin_. It is still used in the
ring, BUFFED meaning stripped naked, though the term BUFF, as applied to
the skin, is most likely due to its resemblance to the leather so
called. “Stripped to the BUFF,” cannot have any reference to dog
skinning, though it may have originally referred to the BUFF jerkins
worn under defensive armour. In Irish cant, BUFFER is a _boxer_. The
BUFFER of a railway-carriage doubtless received its very appropriate
name from the old pugilistic application of this term.

~Buffle-Head~, a stupid or obtuse person.—_Miege._ _German_,
BUFFELHAUPT, buffalo-headed. Occurs in _Plautus’ Comedies made English_,
1694.

~Buffs~, the Third Regiment of Foot in the British army. From their
facings.

~Buffy~, intoxicated.

~Buggy~, a gig, or light chaise. Common term in America and in India, as
well as in England.

~Bug-Hunter~, a low wretch who plunders drunken men.

~Bug-Walk~, a coarse term for a bed.

~Build~, applied in fashionable slang to the make or style of dress, &c.
“It’s a tidy BUILD, who made it?” A tailor is sometimes called a
“trousers’ BUILDER.”

~Bulger~, large; synonymous with BUSTER.

~Bulky~, a constable.—_North._

~Bull~, one who agrees to purchase stock at a future day, at a stated
price, but who simply speculates for a rise in public securities to
render the transaction a profitable one. Should stocks fall, the BULL is
then called upon to pay the difference. _See_ BEAR, who is the opposite
of a BULL, the former selling, the latter purchasing—the one operating
for a _fall_, the other for a _rise_.

~Bull~, a crown-piece, formerly BULL’S EYE. _See_ WORK.

~Bull~, term amongst prisoners for the meat served to them in jail. Also
very frequently used instead of the word beef. The costermonger often
speaks of his dinner, when he has beef, as a “bit o’ BULL,” without any
reference to its being either tough or tender, but he never speaks of
mutton as “sheep.”

~Bull-Beef~, a term of contempt; “as ugly as BULL-BEEF,” “go to the
billy-fencer, and sell yourself for BULL-BEEF.” Sometimes used to
indicate full size of anything. “There was he, as big as BULL-BEEF.”

~Bulldogs~, the runners who accompany the proctor in his perambulations,
and give chase to runaways.—_University._

~Bullet~, to discharge from a situation. To shake the BULLET at anyone,
is to threaten him with “the sack,” but not to give him actual notice to
leave. To get the BULLET is to get notice, while to get the instant
BULLET is to be discharged upon the spot. The use of the term is most
probably derived from a fancied connexion between it and the word
discharge.

~Bullfinch~, a hunting term for a large, thick, quickset hedge,
difficult alike to “top” or burst through. Probably a corruption of
BULL-FENCE, a fence made to prevent cattle straying either in or out.

~Bull the Cask~, to pour hot water into an empty rum puncheon, and let
it stand until it extracts the spirit from the wood. The mixture is
drunk by sailors in default of something stronger.—_Sea._

~Bully~, a braggart; in the language of the streets, a man of the most
degraded morals, who protects fallen females, and lives off their
miserable earnings.—_Shakspeare_, in _A Midsummer Night’s Dream_, uses
the word in its old form, as a term of endearment. This epithet is often
applied in a commendable sense among the vulgar; thus—a good fellow or
a good horse will be termed “a BULLY fellow,” “a BULLY horse;” and “a
BULLY woman” signifies a right, good motherly old soul. Among Americans,
“BULLY for you,” is a commendatory phrase, and “that’s BULLY” is a
highly eulogistic term.

~Bullyrag~, to abuse or scold vehemently; to swindle one out of money by
intimidation and sheer abuse.

~Bum~, the part on which we sit.—_Shakspeare._ BUMBAGS, trousers;
_Gael._ BUN, a base or bottom; _Welsh_, BON, the lowest or worst part of
anything.

~Bum-Bailiff~, a sheriff’s-officer—a term, some say, derived from the
proximity which this gentleman generally maintains to his victims.
Blackstone says it is a corruption of “bound bailiff.” A BUM-BAILIFF was
generally called “bummy.”

~Bumble~, to muffle. BUMBLE-FOOTED, club-footed, or awkward in the gait.

~Bumble~, a beadle. Adopted from _Dickens’s_ character in _Oliver
Twist_. This and “BUMBLEDOM” are now common.

~Bumble-Puppy~, a game played in public-houses on a large stone, placed
in a slanting direction, on the lower end of which holes are excavated,
and numbered like the holes in a bagatelle-table. The player rolls a
stone ball, or marble, from the higher end, and according to the number
of the hole it falls into the game is counted. It is undoubtedly the
very ancient game of _Troule-in-madame_.

~Bumbles~, coverings for the eyes of horses that shy in harness.

~Bumbrusher~, an usher at a school.

~Bumclink~, in the Midland counties the inferior beer brewed for
haymakers and harvest labourers. Derivation obvious.

~Bum-Curtain~, an old name for academical gowns when they were worn
scant and short, especially those of the students of St. John’s
College.—_Camb. Univ._ Any ragged or short academical gown.

~Bummarees~, a term given to a class of speculating salesmen at
Billingsgate market, not recognised as such by the trade, but who get a
living by buying large quantities of fish from the salesmen and
re-selling them to smaller buyers. The word has been used in the
statutes and bye-laws of the market for upwards of 200 years. It has
been variously derived. Some persons think it may be from the _French_
BONNE MARÉE, good fresh fish! “Marée signifie toute sorte de poisson de
mer qui n’est pas sale; bonne marée—_marée fraîche_, vendeur de
marée.”—_Dict. de l’Acad. Franc._ The BUMMAREES are accused of many
trade tricks. One of them is to blow up codfish with a pipe until they
look double their actual size. Of course when the fish come to table
they are flabby, sunken, and half dwindled away. In Norwich, to BUMMAREE
one is to run up a score at a public-house just open, and is equivalent
to “running into debt with one.” One of the advertisements issued by Hy.
Robinson’s “Office,” over against Threadneedle Street, was this:—

    “Touching Advice from the OFFICE, you are desired to give and take
    notice as followeth:—

    “OF Monies to be taken up, or delivered on _Botto-maria_, commonly
    called _Bomarie_.

    “OF money to be put out or taken upon interest,” &c.

    —_The Publick Intelligencer_, numb. 17, 25th June, 1660.

~Bummer~, literally one who sits or idles about; a loafer; one who
sponges upon his acquaintances. In California, men who profess to be
journalists, and so obtain free dinners and drinks, are called “literary
BUMMERS.” Although the term is not much in use in this country, the
profession of bumming, both literary and otherwise, is freely practised.

~Bumper~, according to Johnson from “bump,” but probably from _French_
BON PÈRE, the fixed toast in monastic life of old, now used for “full
measure.” A match at quoits, bowls, &c., may end in a “BUMPER game,” if
the play and score be all on one side. BUMPER is used in sporting and
theatrical circles to denote a benefit which is one in reality as well
as in name.

~Bumptious~, arrogant, self-sufficient. One on very good terms with
himself is said to be BUMPTIOUS.

~Bunce~, costermongers’ perquisites; the money obtained by giving light
weight, &c.; costermongers’ goods sold by boys on commission. In fact
anything which is clear profit or gain is said to be “all BUNCE.”
Probably a corruption of _bonus_; BONE, or BONER, being the slang for
good. BUNCE, _Grose_ gives as the cant word for money.

~Bunch-of-Fives~, the hand, or fist.

~Bundle~, “to BUNDLE a person off,” _i.e._, to pack him off, send him
flying.

~Bundling~, men and women sleeping together, where the divisions of the
house will not permit of better or more decent accommodation, with all
their clothes on. BUNDLING was originally courting done in bed, the
lovers being tied or bundled up to prevent undue familiarities. The
practice still obtains in some parts of Wales.

~Bung~, the landlord of a public-house. Much in use among sporting men.

~Bung~, to give, pass, hand over, drink, or to perform almost any
action. BUNG up, to close up, as the eyes.—_Pugilistic._ “BUNG over the
rag,” hand over the money.—_Old_, used by _Beaumont_ and _Fletcher_,
and _Shakspeare_. Also, to deceive one by a lie, to CRAM, which _see_.

~Bunk~, to decamp. “BUNK it!” _i.e._, be off.

~Bunker~, beer.

~Bunkum~, an American importation, denoting false sentiments in
speaking, pretended enthusiasm, &c. The expression arose from a speech
made by a North Carolina senator named Buncombe.

~Bunter~, a prostitute, a street-walking female thief.

~Burdon’s Hotel~, Whitecross Street Prison, of which the Governor was a
Mr. Burdon. Almost every prison has a nickname of this kind, either from
the name of the Governor, or from some local circumstance. The Queen’s
Bench has also an immense number of names—SPIKE PARK, &c.; and every
Chief-Justice stands godfather to it.

~Burerk~, a lady, a showily-dressed woman.

~Burke~, to kill, to murder, secretly and without noise, by means of
strangulation. From Burke, the notorious Edinburgh murderer, who, with
an accomplice named Hare, used to decoy people into the den he
inhabited, kill them, and sell their bodies for dissection. The wretches
having been apprehended and tried, Burke was executed, while Hare,
having turned king’s evidence, was released. Bishop and Williams were
their London imitators. The term BURKE is now usually applied to any
project that is quietly stopped or stifled—as “the question has been
BURKED.” A book suppressed before publication is said to be BURKED.

~Burra~, great; as BURRA SAIB, a great man; BURRA KHANAII, a great
dinner.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Bury a Moll~, to run away from a mistress.

~Bus~, or BUSS, an abbreviation of “omnibus,” a public carriage. Also, a
kiss, abbreviation of _Fr._ BAISER. A Mr. Shillibeer started the first
BUS in London. A shillibeer is now a hearse and mourning coach all in
one, used by the very poorest mourners and shabbiest undertakers.

    Why is Temple Bar like a lady’s veil? Because it wants to be removed
    to make way for the BUSSES.

~Bus~, business (of which it is a contraction) or action on the stage,
so written, but pronounced BIZ.—_Theatrical._ _See_ BIZ.

~Business~, the action which accompanies dialogue. “His BUSINESS was
good.” Generally applied to byplay.—_Theatrical._

~Busk~, to sell obscene songs and books at the bars and in the tap-rooms
of public-houses. Sometimes it implies selling other articles. Also to
“work” public-houses and certain spots as an itinerant musician or
vocalist.

~Busker~, a man who sings or performs in a public-house; an itinerant.

~Bust~, or BURST, to tell tales, to SPLIT, to inform. BUSTING, informing
against accomplices when in custody.

~Buster~ (BURSTER), a small new loaf; “twopenny BUSTER,” a twopenny
loaf. “A penn’orth o’ BEES-WAX (cheese) and a penny BUSTER,” a common
snack at beershops. A halfpenny loaf is called a “starver.”

~Buster~, an extra size; “what a BUSTER,” _i.e._, what a large one; “in
for a BUSTER,” determined on an extensive frolic or spree. _Scotch_,
BUSTUOUS; _Icelandic_, BOSTRA.

~Bustle~, money; “to draw the BUSTLE.”

~Busy-Sack~, a carpet-bag.

~Butcha~, a Hindoo word in use among Englishmen for the young of any
animal. In England we ask after the children; in India the health of the
BUTCHAS is tenderly inquired for.

~Butcher~, the king in playing-cards. When card-playing in public houses
was common, the kings were called butchers, the queens bitches, and the
knaves jacks. The latter term is now in general use.

~Butcher’s Mourning~, a white hat with a black mourning hatband.
Probably because, under any circumstances, a butcher would rather not
wear a black hat. White hats and black bands have, however, become
genteel ever since the late Prince Consort patronized them, though they
retain a deal of the old sporting leaven.

~Butter~, or BATTER, praise or flattery. To BUTTER, to flatter, cajole.
Same as “soft soap” and “soft sawder.” Soft words generally. Maybe from
the old proverb, “Fine words butter no parsneps.”

~Butter-Fingered~, apt to let things fall; greasy or slippery-fingered.

~Button~, a decoy, sham purchaser, &c. At any mock or sham auction seedy
specimens may be seen. Probably from the connexion of buttons with
Brummagem, which is often used as a synonym for a sham.—_See_ BONNET.

~Buttoner~, a man who entices another to play.

~Buttons~, a page,—from the rows of gilt buttons which adorn his
jacket.

~Buttons~, “not to have all one’s BUTTONS;” to be deficient in
intellect. To “make BUTTONS” means for some occult reason to look sorry
and sad. “He was making BUTTONS,” _i.e._, he was looking sorrowful.
Perhaps because button-making is a sorry occupation.

~Butty~, a word used in the mining districts to denote a kind of
overseer. Also used by the Royal Marines in the sense of comrade; a
policeman’s assistant, one of the staff in a _mêlée_.

~Buz~, to share equally the last of a bottle of wine, when there is not
enough for a full glass to each of the party.

~Buz~, a well-known public-house game, played as follows:—“The chairman
commences saying “one,” the next on the left hand “two,” the next
“three,” and so on to _seven_, when “BUZ” must be said. Every seven and
multiple of 7, as 14, 17, 21, 27, 28, &c., must not be mentioned, but
“BUZ” instead. Whoever breaks the rule pays a fine, which is thrown on
the table, and the accumulation expended in drink for the company. _See_
“SNOOKS and WALKER” for more complicated varieties of a similar game.
These “parlour pastimes” are often not only funny, but positively
ingenious. But the Licensing Act and a zealous police are fast clearing
them all out.

~Buz~, to pick pockets; BUZZING or BUZ-FAKING, robbing.

~Buz-Bloke~, a pickpocket who principally confines his attention to
purses and loose cash. _Grose_ gives BUZ-GLOAK, an ancient cant word.
GLOAK was old cant for a man. BUZ-NAPPER, a young pickpocket.

~Buz-man~, an informer; from BUZ, to whisper, but more generally a
thief.

~Buz-napper’s Academy~, a school in which young thieves were trained.
Figures were dressed up, and experienced tutors stood in various
difficult attitudes for the boys to practise upon. When clever enough
they were sent on the streets. Dickens gives full particulars of this
old style of business in _Oliver Twist_.

~Buzzer~, a pickpocket. _Grose_ gives BUZ-COVE and, as above mentioned,
BUZ-GLOAK.

~Byblow~, an illegitimate child.

~By George~, an exclamation similar to BY JOVE. The term is older than
is frequently imagined—vide _Bacchus and Venus_ (p. 117), 1737. “’Fore
(or by) GEORGE, I’d knock him down.” Originally in reference to Saint
George, the patron saint of England, or possibly to the House of
Hanover.

~By Golly~, an ejaculation, or oath; a compromise for “by God.” BY GUM
is another oblique oath. In the United States, small boys are permitted
by their guardians to say GOL DARN anything, but they are on no account
allowed to commit the profanity of G--d d----n anything. A manner of
“sailing close to the wind” which is objectionable to the honest mind. A
specimen ejaculation and moral waste-pipe for interior passion or wrath
is seen in the exclamation—BY THE EVER-LIVING JUMPING-MOSES—a harmless
and ridiculous phrase, that from its length is supposed to expend a
considerable quantity of fiery anger.

~By Jingo~, an oath or exclamation having no particular meaning, and no
positive etymology, though it is believed by some that JINGO is derived
from the Basque _jenco_, the devil.

~Cab~, in statutory language, “a hackney carriage drawn by one horse.”
Abbreviated from the _French_ CABRIOLET; originally meaning “a light low
chaise.” The wags of Paris playing upon the word (quasi _cabri_ au lait)
used to call a superior turn-out of the kind a _cabri au crême_. Our
abbreviation, which certainly smacks of slang, has been stamped with the
authority of the Legislature, and has been honoured by universal custom.

~Cab~, to stick together, to muck, or tumble up.—_Devonshire._

~Cabbage~, pieces of cloth said to be purloined by tailors. Any small
profits in the way of material.

~Cabbage~, to pilfer or purloin. Termed by _Johnson_ a “cant word,” but
adopted by later lexicographers as a respectable term. Said to have been
first used in the above sense by _Arbuthnot_.

~Cabbage-Head~, a soft-headed person.

~Cabby~, popular name for the driver of a cab. This title has almost
supplanted the more ancient one of jarvey.

~Caboose~, the galley or cook-house of a ship; a term used by tramps to
indicate a kitchen.

~Cackle-Tub~, a pulpit.

~Cackling-Cove~, an actor. Also called a MUMMERY-COVE.—_Theatrical._

~Cad~, or CADGER (from which it is shortened), a mean or vulgar fellow;
a beggar; one who would rather live on other people than work for
himself; a man who tries to worm something out of another, either money
or information. _Johnson_ uses the word, and gives _huckster_ as the
meaning, in which sense it was originally used. Apparently from CAGER,
or GAGER, the _old Cant_ term for a man. The exclusives at the English
Universities apply the term CAD to all non-members. It has also been
suggested that the word may be a contraction of the _French_ CADET.

~Cad~, an omnibus conductor. Of late years the term has been generically
applied to the objectionable class immortalized by Thackeray under the
title of snob. A great deal of caddism is, however, perpetrated by those
who profess to have the greatest horror of it—the upper classes—a fact
which goes far to prove that it is impossible to fairly ascribe a
distinctive feature to any grade of society.

~Cadge~, to beg in an artful, wheedling manner.—_North._ In Scotland to
CADGE is to wander, to go astray. _See_ under CODGER.

~Cadging~, begging, generally with an eye to pilfering when an
opportunity occurs. To be “on the cadge” is almost synonymous with “on
the make.”

~Cag~, to irritate, affront, anger. Schoolboy slang.

~Cage~, a minor kind of prison. A country lock-up which contained no
offices.

~Cagmag~, bad food, scraps, odds and ends; or that which no one could
relish. _Grose_ give CAGG MAGGS, old and tough Lincolnshire geese, sent
to London to feast the poor cockneys. _Gael._, _French_, and _Welsh_,
CAC, and MAGN. A correspondent at Trinity College, Dublin, considers
this as originally a University slang term for a _bad cook_, κακὸς
μάγειρος. There is also a _Latin_ word used by Pliny, MAGMA, denoting
dregs or dross.

~Cake~, a “flat;” a soft or doughy person, a fool.

~Cakey-Pannum-Fencer~, or PANNUM-FENCER, a man who sells street pastry.

~Calaboose~, a prison.—_Sea_ slang, from the Spanish.

~Calculate~, a word much in use among the inhabitants of the Western
States U.S., as “I CALCULATE you are a stranger here.” New Englanders
use the word “guess” instead of CALCULATE, while the Virginians prefer
to say “reckon.”

~Caleb Quotem~, a parish clerk; a jack of all trades. From a character
in _The Wags of Windsor_.

~California~, or CALIFORNIANS, money. Term generally applied to gold
only. Derivation very obvious.

~Call~, a notice of rehearsal, or any other occasion requiring the
company’s presence, posted up in a theatre. “We’re CALLED for eleven
to-morrow morning.”

~Call-a-Go~, in street “patter,” is to leave off trying to sell anything
and to remove to another spot, to desist. Also to give in, yield, at any
game or business. Probably from the “GO” call in cribbage.

~Cameronians~, THE, the Twenty-sixth Regiment of Foot in the British
Army.

~Camesa~, shirt or chemise.—_Span._ _See_ its abbreviated form, MISH,
from the _ancient Cant_, COMMISSION. Probably re-introduced by the
remains of De Lacy Evans’s Spanish Legion on their return. _See_
Somerville’s account of the Span. Leg., for the curious facility with
which the lower classes in England adopt foreign words as slang and cant
terms. _Italian_, CAMICIA. This latter is the more likely etymology, as
anyone who visits the various quarters where Irish, Italians, and a
mongrel mixture of half-a-dozen races congregate and pig together, will
admit.

~Camister~, a preacher, clergyman, or master.

~Canary~, a sovereign. From the colour. Very old slang indeed.

~Canister~, the head.—_Pugilistic._

~Canister-Cap~, a hat.

~Cannibals~, the training boats for the Cambridge freshmen, _i.e._,
“CANNOT-PULLS.” The term is applied both to boats and rowers.—_See_
SLOGGERS. Torpids is the usual term for the races in which these men and
machines figure.

~Cannikin~, a small can, similar to PANNIKIN. “And let the CANNIKIN
clink.”

~Cant~, a blow or toss; “a CANT over the kisser,” a blow on the mouth;
“a CANT over the buttock,” a throw or toss in wrestling.

~Cantab~, a student at Cambridge.

~Cantankerous~, litigious, bad-tempered. An American corruption probably
of contentious. A reviewer of an early edition of this book derives it
from the _Anglo-Norman_ CONTEK, litigation or strife. Others have
suggested “cankerous” as the origin. _Bailey_ has CONTEKE, contention as
a Spenserian word, and there is the _O.E._ CONTEKORS, quarrelsome
persons.

~Cant of Togs~, a gift of clothes.

~Canvasseens~, sailors’ canvas trousers.

~Cap~, a false cover to a tossing coin. The term and the instrument are
both nearly obsolete. _See_ COVER-DOWN.

~Cap~, “to set her CAP.” A woman is said to set her CAP at a man when
she makes overt love to him.

~Cap~, to outdo or add to, as in capping jokes.

~Cape Cod Turkey~, salt fish.

~Caper-Merchant~, a dancing-master. Sometimes a hop-merchant.

~Capers~, dancing, frolicking; “to cut CAPER-SAUCE,” _i.e._, to dance
upon nothing—be hanged. Old thieves’ talk.

~Capper-Clawing~, female encounter, where caps are torn and nails freely
used. Sometimes it is pronounced CLAPPER-CLAW. The word occurs in
_Shakspeare_, _Troilus and Cressida_, act v. sc. 4.

~Caravan~, a railway train, especially a train expressly chartered to
convey people to a prize fight.

~Caravansera~, a railway station. In pugilistic phraseology a tip for
the starting point might have been given thus. “The SCRATCH must be TOED
at sharp five, so the CARAVAN will start at four from the CARAVANSERA.”

~Carboy~, a general term in most parts of the world for a very large
glass or earthenware bottle.

~Card~, a character. “A queer CARD,” _i.e._, an odd fish.

~Cardinal~, a lady’s red cloak. A cloak with this name was in fashion in
the year 1760. It received its title from its similarity in shape to one
of the vestments of a cardinal. Also mulled red wine.

~Cardwell’s Men~, officers promoted in pursuance of the new system of
non-purchase.

~Carney~, soft hypocritical language. Also, to flatter, wheedle, or
insinuate oneself.—_Prov._

~Carnish~, meat, from the _Ital._ CARNE, flesh; a _Lingua Franca_
importation; CARNISH-KEN, a thieves’ eating-house; “cove of the
CARNISH-KEN,” the keeper thereof.—_North Country Cant._

~Caroon~, five shillings. _French_, COURONNE; _Gipsy_, COURNA;
_Spanish_, CORONA.

~Carpet~, “upon the CARPET,” any subject or matter that is uppermost for
discussion or conversation. Frequently quoted as _sur le tapis_, or more
generally “on the _tapis_,” but it does not seem to be at all known in
France. Also servants’ slang. When a domestic is summoned by the master
or mistress to receive a warning or reprimand, he or she is said to be
CARPETED. The corresponding term in commercial establishments is a
WIGGING.

~Carpet-Knight~, an habitué of drawing-rooms, a “ladies’ man.”

~Carrier-Pigeon~, a swindler, one who formerly used to cheat
lottery-office keepers. Now used among betting men to describe one who
runs from place to place with “commissions.”

~Carriwitchet~, a hoaxing, puzzling question, not admitting of a
satisfactory answer, as—“How far is it from the first of July to London
Bridge?” “If a bushel of apples cost ten shillings, how long will it
take for an oyster to eat its way through a barrel of soap?”

~Carrot.~ “Take a CARROT!” a vulgar insulting phrase.

~Carrots~, the coarse and satirical term for red hair. An epigram gives
an illustration of the use of this term:—

    “Why scorn red hair? The Greeks, we know,
      (I note it here in charity)
    Had taste in beauty, and with them
      The graces were all Χάριται!”

Of late years CARROTY hair in all its shades has been voted beautiful,
_i.e._, fashionable.

~Carry Corn~, to bear success well and equally. It is said of a man who
breaks down under a sudden access of wealth—as successful horse-racing
men and unexpected legatees often do—or who becomes affected and
intolerant, that “he doesn’t CARRY CORN well.”

~Carry me Out!~ an exclamation of pretended astonishment on hearing news
too good to be true, or a story too marvellous to be believed. Sometimes
varied by “Let me die,” _i.e._, I can’t survive that. Profanely derived
from the _Nunc dimittis_ (Luke xi. 29). The Irish say, “CARRY ME OUT,
and bury me decently.”

~Carry-on~, to joke a person to excess, to CARRY ON a “spree” too far;
“how we CARRIED ON, to be sure!” _i.e._, what fun we had. _Nautical
term_—from carrying on sail.

~Carts~, a pair of shoes. In Norfolk the carapace of a crab is called a
_crab cart_; hence CARTS would be synonymous with CRAB SHELLS, which
_see_.

~Cart-wheel~, a five-shilling piece. Generally condensed to “WHEEL.”

~Ca-sa~, a writ of _capias ad satisfaciendam_.—_Legal slang._

~Casa~, or CASE, a house, respectable or otherwise. Probably from the
Italian CASA.—_Old Cant._ The Dutch use the word KAST in a vulgar sense
for a house, _i.e._, MOTTEKAST, a brothel. CASE sometimes means a
water-closet, but is in general applied to a “house of accommodation.”
CASA is generally pronounced _carzey_.

~Cascade~, to vomit.

~Case.~ Some years ago the term CASE was applied generally to persons or
things; “what a CASE he is,” _i.e._, what a curious person; “a rum CASE
that,” or “you are a CASE,” both synonymous with the phrase “odd fish,”
common half a century ago. This would seem to have been originally a
“case” for the police-court; drunkenness, &c. Among young ladies at
boarding-schools a CASE means a love-affair. CASE now means any
unfortunate matter. “I’m afraid it’s a CASE with him.”

~Case~, a bad crown-piece. HALF-A-CASE, a counterfeit half-crown. There
are two sources, either of which may have contributed this slang term.
CASER is the Hebrew word for a crown; and silver coin is frequently
counterfeited by coating or CASING pewter or iron imitations with
silver. Possibly from its being “a CASE” with the unfortunate owner.

~Cask~, fashionable slang for a brougham, or other private carriage. Not
very general. “PILLBOX” is the more usual term.

~Cassam~, cheese—not CAFFAN, which Egan, in his edition of _Grose_, has
ridiculously inserted.—_Ancient Cant._ _Latin_, CASEUS. _Gael._ and
_Irish_, CAISE.

~Cast~, to assist by lightening labour. Men in small boats who want to
be towed behind steamers or sailing vessels, say “Give us a CAST.” Also
used by waggoners and others, who sometimes vary the performance by
asking, when stuck on a hill, for a pound, possibly a pound of flesh,
horse or human.

~Cast up Accounts~, to vomit.—_Old._

~Castor~, a hat. Mostly used in pugilistic circles. Indeed many
hangers-on of the P.R. have considered that the term arose from the
custom of casting the hat into the ring, before entering oneself. CASTOR
was the _Latin_ name for the animal now known as the BEAVER; and,
strange to add, BEAVER was the slang for CASTOR, or hat, many years ago,
before gossamer came into fashion.

~Cat~, a lady’s muff; “to free a CAT,” _i.e._, steal a muff.

~Cat~, to vomit like a cat. Perhaps from CATARACT; but _see_ SHOOT THE
CAT.

~Cat~—CAT O’ NINE TAILS, a whip with that number of lashes used to
punish refractory sailors.—_Sea._ The “cat” is now a recognised term
for the punishmental whip.

~Catamaran~, a disagreeable old woman.—_Thackeray._

~Cat and Kitten Sneaking~, stealing pint and quart pots and small pewter
spirit measures from public-houses.

~Cataract~, once a black satin scarf arranged for the display of
jewellery, much in vogue among “commercial gents.” Now quite out of
date.

~Catchbet~, a bet made for the purpose of entrapping the unwary by means
of a paltry subterfuge. _See_ CHERRY COLOUR.

~Catch-’em-Alive~, a humane trap; also a small-tooth comb. A piece of
paper smeared with a sweet sticky substance which is spread about where
flies most abound, and in this sense not particularly humane. The
CATCH-’EM-ALIVE trap for rats and other such animals is humane compared
with the gin trap.

~Catch-penny~, any temporary contrivance to obtain money from the
public; penny shows, or cheap exhibitions. Also descriptions of murders
which have never taken place.

~Catchy~ (similar formation to _touchy_), inclined to take an undue
advantage.

~Caterwauling~, applied derisively to inharmonious singing; also
love-making, from the noise of cats similarly engaged.

~Catever~, a queer, or singular affair; anything poor, or very bad. From
the _Lingua Franca_, and _Italian_, CATTIVO, bad. Variously spelled by
the lower orders.—_See_ KERTEVER.

~Cat-faced~, a vulgar and very common expression of contempt in the
North of England.

~Catgut-Scraper~, a fiddler.

~Cat-in-the-Pan~, a traitor, a turncoat—derived by some from the
_Greek_, καταπαν, altogether; or—and more likely—from _cake in pan_, a
pan-cake, which is frequently turned from side to side.

~Cat-lap~, a contemptuous expression for weak drink. Anything a cat will
drink is very innocuous.

~Cats and Dogs.~ It is said to rain cats and dogs when a shower is
exceptionally heavy. Probably in ridicule of the remarkable showers
which used to find their way into the papers during the “silly season.”

~Cat’s-meat~, a coarse term for the lungs—the “lights” or lungs of
animals being usually sold to feed cats.

~Cat’s-paw~, a dupe or tool. From the old story of the monkey who used
the cat’s-paw to remove his roast chestnuts from the fire. A sea term,
meaning light and occasional breezes occurring in calm weather.

~Cat’s-water~, “old Tom,” or gin.

~Cattle~, a term of contempt applied to the mob, or to a lot of lazy,
helpless servants.

~Caucus~, a private meeting held for the purpose of concerting measures,
agreeing upon candidates for office before an election, &c. This is an
American term, and a corruption of CAULKER’S MEETING, being derived from
an association of the shipping interest at Boston, previous to the War
of Independence, who were very active in getting up opposition to
England.—_See Pickering’s Vocabulary._

~Caulk~, to take a surreptitious nap; sleep generally, from the ordinary
meaning of the term; stopping leaks, repairing damages, so as to come
out as good as new.—_Sea term._

~Caulker~, a dram. The term “caulker” is usually applied to a stiff
glass of grog—preferably brandy—finishing the potations of the
evening. _See_ WHITEWASH.

~Caulker~, a too marvellous story, a lie. CHOKER has the same sense.

~Caution~, anything out of the common way. “He’s a CAUTION,” is said of
an obdurate or argumentative man. The phrase is also used in many ways
in reference to places and things.

~Cavaulting~, a vulgar phrase equivalent to “horsing.” The _Italian_
CAVALLINO, signifies a rake or debauchee.—_Lingua Franca_, CAVOLTA.
From this comes the Americanism “cavorting,” running or riding round in
a heedless or purposeless manner.

~Cave~, or CAVE IN, to submit, shut up.—_American._ Metaphor taken from
the sinking of an abandoned mining shaft.

~Chaff~, to gammon, joke, quiz, or praise ironically. Originally “to
queer” represented our modern word “CHAFF.” CHAFF-bone, the
jaw-bone.—_Yorkshire._ CHAFF, jesting. In _Anglo-Saxon_, CEAF is chaff;
and CEAFL, bill, beak, or jaw. In the _Ancren Riwle_, A.D. 1221, CEAFLE
is used in the sense of idle discourse.

~Chaffer~, the mouth; “moisten your CHAFFER,” _i.e._, take something to
drink.

~Chal~, old Romany term for a man; CHIE was the name for a woman.

~Chalk out~, or CHALK DOWN, to mark out a line of conduct or action; to
make a rule or order. Phrase derived from the _Workshop_.

~Chalk up~, to credit, make entry in account books of indebtedness; “I
can’t pay you now, but you can CHALK IT UP,” _i.e._, charge me with the
article in your day-book. From the old practice of chalking one’s score
for drink behind the bar-doors of public-houses.

~Chalks~, “to walk one’s CHALKS,” to move off, or run away. An ordeal
for drunkenness used on board ship, to see whether the suspected person
can walk on a chalked line without overstepping it on either side.

~Chalks~, degrees, marks; so called from being made by a piece of chalk;
“to beat by long CHALKS,” _i.e._, to be superior by many degrees.
“Making CHALKS” is a term connected with the punishment of boys on board
ship, and in the Naval School at Greenwich. Two chalk lines are drawn
wide apart on the deck or floor, and the boy to be punished places a
foot on each of these lines, and stoops, thereby presenting a convenient
portion of his person to the boatswain or master.

~Chance the Ducks~, an expression signifying come what may. “I’ll do it,
and CHANCE THE DUCKS.”

~Chancery~, a pugilistic phrase for difficulties; “to get a man’s head
into CHANCERY,” _i.e._, to get an opponent’s head firmly under one’s
arm, where it can be pommelled with immense power, and without any
possibility of immediate extrication. From the helplessness of a suitor
in Chancery. This opportunity was of very rare occurrence when the
combatants were at all evenly matched.

~Change~, small money. The overplus returned after paying for a thing in
a round sum. Hence a slang expression used when a person receives a
“settler” in the shape of either a repartee or a blow—“Take your CHANGE
out of that!”

~Chap~, a fellow, a boy; “a low CHAP,” a low fellow—abbreviation of
CHAPMAN, a huckster. Used by _Byron_ in his _Critical Remarks_.

~Chapel~, a printers’ assembly, held for the purpose of discussing
differences between employer and workmen, trade regulations, or other
matters. The term is scarcely slang, but some “comps” ask its insertion
in this work.

~Chapel.~ An undergrad is expected to attend seven out of the fourteen
services in chapel each week, and to let four or five be morning
chapels. Occasionally a Don—the Dean as a rule—will “CHAPEL” him, that
is, order him to attend to worship his Creator twice daily. The Bible
clerk “pricks the list,” _i.e._, marks down the names of all
present.—_Univ._

~Chapel-of-ease.~ _French_, CABINET D’AISANCE, a house of office.

~Chariot-buzzing~, picking pockets in an omnibus.

~Charley~, a watchman, a beadle. Almost obsolete now.

~Charley-pitcher~, a low, cheating gambler.

~Charlies~, a woman’s breasts. Also called dairies and bubbies.

~Chats~, lice, or body vermin. _Prov._, any small things of the same
kind.

~Chatter-basket~, common term for a prattling child amongst nurses.

~Chatter-box~, an incessant talker or chatterer.

~Chatty~, a filthy person, one whose clothes are not free from vermin;
CHATTY DOSS, a lousy bed. A CHATTY DOSSER or a CRUMMY DOSSER is a filthy
tramp or houseless wanderer.

~Chaunt~, to sing the contents of any paper in the streets. CANT, as
applied to vulgar language, may have been derived from CHAUNT.

~Chaunt~, “to CHAUNT the play,” to explain the tricks and manœuvres of
thieves.

~Chaunter-culls~, a singular body of men who used to haunt certain
well-known public-houses, and write satirical or libellous ballads on
any person, or body of persons, for a consideration. 7_s._ 6_d._ was the
usual fee, and in three hours the ballad might be heard in St. Paul’s
Churchyard, or other public spot. Strange as it may appear, there are
actually two men in London at the present day who gain their living in
this way. Very recently they were singing before the establishment of a
fashionable tailor in Regent Street; and not long since they were
bawling their doggrel rhymes outside the mansion of a Norfolk M.P., in
Belgravia.[57]

~Chaunters~, those street sellers of ballads, last copies of verses, and
other broadsheets, who sang or bawled the contents of their papers. They
often termed themselves PAPER WORKERS. Cheap evening papers and private
executions have together combined to improve these folks’ occupations
off the face of the earth. _See_ HORSE-CHAUNTERS.

~Chaw~, to chew; CHAW UP, to get the better of one, finish him up;
CHAWED UP, utterly done for.

~Chaw-bacon~, a rustic. Derived from the popular idea that a countryman
lives entirely on bread and fat bacon. A country clown, a joskin, a
yokel, a clodcrusher. These terms are all exchangeable.

~Chaw over~, to repeat one’s words with a view to ridicule.

~Cheap~, “doing it on the CHEAP,” living economically, or keeping up a
showy appearance with very little means.

~Cheap Jacks~, or JOHNS, oratorical hucksters and patterers of hardware,
who put an article up at a high price, and then cheapen it by degrees,
indulging all the time in volleys of coarse wit, until it becomes to all
appearance a bargain, and as such it is bought by one of the crowd. The
popular idea is that the inverse method of auctioneering saves them
paying for the auction licence.—_See_ DUTCH AUCTION.

~Checks~, counters used in games at cards. In the Pacific States of
America a man who is dead is said to have handed (or passed) in his
checks. The gamblers there are responsible for many of the
colloquialisms current.

~Chee-Chee~, this word is used in a rather offensive manner to denote
Eurasians,[58] or children by an English father and native mother. It
takes its origin in a very common expression of half-caste females,
“CHEE-CHEE,” equivalent to our Oh, fie!—Nonsense!—For
shame!—_Anglo-Indian._

~Cheek~, share or portion; “where’s my CHEEK?” where is my allowance?
“All to his own CHEEK,” all to himself.

~Cheek~, impudence, assurance; CHEEKY, saucy or forward.

~Cheek~, to irritate by impudence, to accuse.

~Cheek by Jowl~, side by side—said often of persons in such close
confabulation that their faces almost touch.

~Cheese~, anything good, first-rate in quality, genuine, pleasant, or
advantageous, is termed the CHEESE. The _London Guide_, 1818, says it
was from some young fellows translating “c’est une autre CHOSE” into
“that is another CHEESE.” But the expression CHEESE may be found in the
Gipsy vocabulary, and in the Hindostanee and Persian languages. In the
last CHIZ means a thing—that is the thing, _i.e._, the CHEESE.

~Cheese~, or CHEESE IT (evidently a corruption of _cease_), leave off,
or have done; “CHEESE your barrikin,” hold your noise. Term very common.

~Cheesecutter~, a prominent and aquiline nose. Also a large square peak
to a cap. Caps fitted with square peaks are called cheesecutter caps.

~Cheesemongers~, once a popular name for the First Lifeguards. Until the
Peninsular War the First Lifeguards, from their almost exclusive service
at home, were nicknamed CHEESEMONGERS. This term then fell into
desuetude; but at Waterloo the commanding officer of the regiment had
not forgotten it, and when leading his men to the charge, called out,
“Come on, you damned CHEESEMONGERS!” an invitation complied with so
readily, that the title was restored, with the difference that it was no
longer a word of reproach.

~Cheesy~, fine or showy. The opposite of “dusty.”

~Cherry-bums~, or CHERUBIMS, a nickname given to the 11th Hussars, from
their crimson trousers.

~Cherry-colour~, either red or black, as you wish; a term used in a
cheating trick at cards. When the cards are being dealt, a knowing one
offers to bet that he will tell the colour of the turn-up card. “Done!”
says Mr. Green. The sum being named, Mr. Sharp affirms that it will be
CHERRY-COLOUR; and as cherries are either black or red, he wins, leaving
his victim a wiser man, it is to be hoped, and not a _better_ for the
future. It may be as well for the habitually unfortunate to know that
wagers of this kind are not recoverable even according to the sporting
code, which disacknowledges all kinds of catch-bets.

~Cherry-merry~, a present of money. CHERRY-MERRY-BAMBOO, a
beating.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Cherubs~, or still more vulgarly, CHERUBIMS, the chorister boys who
chaunt in the services at the abbeys and cathedrals. Possibly because in
some places their heads alone are visible.

~Cheshire Cat~, to grin like a CHESHIRE CAT, to display the teeth and
gums when laughing. Formerly the phrase was “to grin like a CHESHIRE CAT
eating cheese.” A hardly satisfactory explanation has been given of this
phrase—that Cheshire is a county palatine, and the cats, when they
think of it, are so tickled with the notion that they can’t help
grinning.[59]

~Chicken~, a term applied to anything young, small, or insignificant;
CHICKEN STAKES, small paltry stakes; “she’s no CHICKEN,” said of an old
maid.

~Chicken-hearted~, cowardly, fearful. With about the amount of pluck a
chicken in a fright might be supposed to possess.

~Chi-ike~, to hail in a rough though friendly manner; to support by
means of vociferation.

~Chi-ike~, a hail; a good loud word of hearty praise; term used by the
costermongers, who assist the sale of each other’s goods by a little
friendly, although noisy, commendation.

~Children’s Shoes~ (to make), to be made nought of.—_See_ SHOES.

~Chill~, to warm, as beer. This at first seems like reversing the order
of things, but it is only a contraction of “take the CHILL off.”

~Chimney-Sweep~, the aperient mixture commonly called a _black draught_.

~Chin-chin~, a salutation, a compliment.—_Anglo-Chinese._

~Chink~, or CHINKERS, money.—_Ancient._ Derivation obvious.

~Chin-wag~, officious impertinence.

~Chip of the Old Block~, a child which physically or morally resembles
its father. BROTHER CHIP, one of the same trade or profession.
Originally brother carpenter, now general.

~Chips~, money; also a nickname for a carpenter.—_Sea._

~Chirp~, to give information, to “peach.”

~Chisel~, to cheat, to take a slice off anything. Hence the old
conundrum: “Why is a carpenter like a swindler?—Because he chisels a
deal.”

~Chit~, a letter; corruption of a _Hindoo_ word.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Chitterlings~, the shirt frills once fashionable and worn still by
ancient beaux; properly the _entrails of a pig_, to which they are
supposed to bear some resemblance. _Belgian_ SCHYTERLINGH.

~Chivalry~, coition. Probably a corruption from the _Lingua Franca_.
Perhaps from CHEVAULCHER.

~Chive~, or CHIVEY, a shout, a halloo, or cheer; loud tongued. Probably
from CHEVY-CHASE, a boy’s game, in which the word CHEVY is bawled aloud.
Dickens uses the word CHIVEY in _Bleak House_ rather freely, but there
it is from the other phase of CHEVY-CHASE which follows.

~Chive~, a knife; also used as a verb, to knife. In all these cases the
word is pronounced as though written CHIV or CHIVVY.

~Chive-Fencer~, a street hawker of cutlery.

~Chivey~, to chase round, or hunt about. Apparently from
CHEVY-CHASE.—_See_ above.

~Choakee~, or CHOKEY, the black hole.—_Military Anglo-Indian._ Chokey
is also very vulgar slang for prison.

~Chock-Full~, full till the scale comes down with a shock. Originally
CHOKE-FULL, and used in reference to theatres and places of amusement.

~Choke Off~, to get rid of. Bulldogs can only be made to loose their
hold by choking them.[60] Suggestively to get rid of a man by saying
something to him which “sticks in his gizzard.”

~Choker~, a cravat, a neckerchief. WHITE-CHOKER, the white neckerchief
worn by mutes at a funeral, waiters at a tavern, and gentlemen in
evening costume. Clergymen and Exeter Hallites are frequently termed
WHITE-CHOKERS.

~Choker~, or WIND-STOPPER, a garotter.

~Chonkeys~, a kind of mincemeat, baked in a crust, and sold in the
streets.

~Choops~, a corruption of CHOOPRAHO, keep silence.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Chootah~, small, insignificant.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Chop~, in the Canton jargon of _Anglo-Chinese_, this word has several
significations. It means an official seal, a permit, a boat load of
teas. FIRST CHOP signifies first quality; and CHOP-CHOP, to make haste.

~Chop~, to exchange, to “swop.” To CHOP and change, to be as variable as
the wind.

~Chops~, properly CHAPS, the mouth, or cheeks; “down in the CHOPS,” or
“down in the mouth,” _i.e._, sad or melancholy.

~Chouse~, to cheat out of one’s share or portion. _Hackluyt_, CHAUS;
_Massinger_, CHIAUS. From the _Turkish_, in which language it signifies
an interpreter. _Gifford_ gives a curious story as to its origin:—

    “In the year 1609 there was attached to the Turkish embassy in
    England an Interpreter, or CHIAOUS, who, by cunning, aided by his
    official position, managed to cheat the Turkish and Persian
    merchants, then in London, out of the large sum of £4000, then
    deemed an enormous amount. From the notoriety which attended the
    fraud, and the magnitude of the swindle, any one who cheated or
    defrauded was said to _chiaous_, or _chause_, or CHOUSE; to do, that
    is, as this _Chiaous_ had done.”—_See Trench, Eng. Past and
    Present._

CHIAUS, according to _Sandys_ (_Travels_, p. 48), is “one who goes on
embassies, executes commandments,” &c. The particular Chiaus in question
is alluded to in _Ben Jonson’s Alchymist_, 1610.

    “_D._ What do you think of me?
            That I am a CHIAUS?
    _Face._                        What’s that?
    _D._ The Turk [who] was here.
            As one would say, do you think I am a Turk?”

~Chout~, an entertainment.—_East-end of London._

~Chovey~, a shop.—_Costermonger._

~Chow-Chow~, a mixture, food of any kind. Also chit-chat and
gossip.—_Anglo-Chinese._

~Chowdar~, a fool.—_Anglo-Chinese._

~Christening~, erasing the name of the maker, the number, or any other
mark, from a stolen watch, and inserting a fictitious one in its place.

~Chubby~, round-faced, plump. Probably from the same derivative as CHUB,
which means literally a fish with a big head.

~Chuck~, bread or meat; in fact, anything to eat. Also a particular kind
of beefsteak.

~Chuck~, a schoolboy’s treat.—_Westminster School._ Provision for an
entertainment. Hard CHUCK is sea biscuit.

~Chuck~, to throw or pitch.

~Chuck a Jolly~, to bear up or bonnet, as when a costermonger praises
the inferior article his mate or partner is trying to sell. _See_
CHI-IKE.

~Chuck a Stall~, to attract a person’s attention while a confederate
picks his pockets, or otherwise robs him.

~Chuck in~, to challenge—from the pugilistic custom of throwing a hat
into the ring; a modern version of “throwing down the gauntlet.” This
term seems to have gone out of fashion with the custom which gave rise
to it.

~Chuckle-head~, much the same as “buffle head,” “cabbage head,” “chowder
head,” “cod’s head,”—all signifying that large abnormal form of skull
generally supposed to accompany stupidity and weakness of intellect; as
the Scotch proverb, “muckle head and little wit.”—Originally
Devonshire, but now general.

~Chucks!~ Schoolboy’s signal on the master’s approach.

~Chuck up~, to surrender, give in—from the custom of throwing up the
sponge at a prize-fight in token of yielding. This is very often
corrupted into “jack up.”

~Chuff it~, _i.e._, be off, or take it away, in answer to a street
seller who is importuning you to purchase. _Halliwell_ mentions CHUFF as
a “term of reproach,” surly, &c.

~Chull~, make haste. An abbreviation of the _Hindostanee_ CHULLO,
signifying “go along.” CHULL is very commonly used to accelerate the
motions of a servant, driver, or palanquin-bearer.

~Chum~, an intimate acquaintance. A recognised term, but in such
frequent use with slangists that it almost demands a place here. Stated
to be from the _Anglo-Saxon_, CUMA, a guest.

~Chum~, to occupy a joint lodging with another person. _Latin_, CUM.

~Chumming-up~, an old custom amongst prisoners before the present
regulations were in vogue, and before imprisonment for debt was
abolished; when a fresh man was admitted to their number, rough music
was made with pokers, tongs, sticks, and saucepans. For this ovation the
initiated prisoner had to pay, or “fork over,” half-a-crown—or submit
to a loss of coat and waistcoat.

~Chummy~, a chimney-sweep—probably connected with _chimney_; also a
low-crowned felt hat. Sometimes, but rarely, a sweep is called a
clergyman—from his colour.

~Chump~, the head or face. Also one end of a loin of mutton. A
half-idiotic or daft person is said to be off his chump.

~Chunk~, a thick or dumpy piece of any substance, as a CHUNK of bread or
meat.—_Kentish._

~Church a yack~ (or watch), to take the works of a watch from its
original case, and put them into another one, to avoid detection.—_See_
CHRISTEN.

~Churchwarden~, a long pipe, “a yard of clay;” probably so called from
the dignity which seems to hedge the smoker of a churchwarden, and the
responsibility attached to its use. Sometimes called an Alderman.

~Cinder~, any liquor used in connexion with soda-water, as to “take a
soda with a CINDER in it.” The cinder may be sherry, brandy, or any
other liquor.

~Circumbendibus~, a roundabout way, a long-winded story.

~Clack-box~, a garrulous person, so called from the rattle formerly used
by vagrants to make a rattling noise and attract attention.—_Norfolk._

⁂ A common proverb in this county is, “your tongue goes like A BAKER’S
CLAP-DISH,” which is evidently a modern corruption of the beggars’ CLAP
or CLACK-DISH mentioned in _Measure for Measure_. It was a wooden dish
with a movable cover.

~Claggum~, boiled treacle in a hardened state, hardbake.—_See_ CLIGGY.

~Clam, or clem~, to starve.—_North._

~Clap~, to place; “do you think you can CLAP your hand on him?” _i.e._,
find him out. CLAP is also a well-known form of a contagious disease.

~Clapper~, the tongue. Said of an over-talkative person, to be hung in
the middle and to sound with both ends.

~Clap-trap~, high-sounding nonsense. An ancient theatrical term for a
“TRAP to catch a CLAP by way of applause from the spectators at a
play.”—_Bailey’s Dictionary._

~Claret~, blood.—_Pugilistic._ Otherwise Badminton—which _see_.

~Clashy~, a low fellow, a labourer.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Class~, the highest quality or combination of highest qualities among
athletes. “He’s not CLASS enough,” _i.e._, not good enough. “There’s a
deal of CLASS about him,” _i.e._, a deal of quality. The term as used
this way obtains to a certain extent among turfites.

~Clawhammer coat~, an American term for a tail-coat used in evening
costume. Also known as a steel-pen coat.

~Clean~, quite, or entirely; “CLEAN gone,” entirely out of sight, or
away.—_Old_, see Cotgrave and Shakspeare. CLEAN CONTRARY, quite
different, opposite.

~Clean out~, to ruin, or make bankrupt any one; to take all he has got,
by purchase, chicane, or force. De Quincey, in his article on Richard
Bentley, speaking of the lawsuit between that great scholar and Dr.
Colbatch, remarks that the latter “must have been pretty well CLEANED
OUT.” The term is very general.

~Click~, a knock or blow. CLICK-HANDED, left-handed.—_Cornish._ A term
in Cumberland and Westmoreland wrestling for a peculiar kind of throw,
as “an inside CLICK,” or “an outside CLICK.”

~Click~, to snatch, to pull away something that belongs to another.

~Clicker~, a female touter at a bonnet shop. In Northamptonshire, the
cutter out in a shoemaking establishment. In the _Dictionary of the
Terms, Ancient and Modern, of the Canting Crew_, Lond. n. d. (but prior
to 1700), the CLICKER is described as “the shoemaker’s journeyman or
servant, that cutts out all the work, and stands at or walks before the
door, and saies—‘What d’ye lack, sir? what d’ye buy, madam?’” In a
printing-office, a man who makes up the pages, and who takes work and
receives money for himself and companions.

~Clift~, to steal.

~Cliggy~, or CLIDGY, sticky.—_Anglo-Saxon_, CLÆG, clay.—_See_
CLAGGUM.

~Clinch~ (to get the), to be locked up in jail.

~Clincher~, that which rivets or confirms an argument, an
incontrovertible position. Also a lie which cannot be surpassed, a
stopper-up, said to be derived as follows:—Two notorious liars were
backed to outlie each other. “I drove a nail through the moon once,”
said the first. “Right,” said the other; “I recollect the circumstance
well, for I went round to the back part of the moon and _clinched_
it”—hence CLINCHER.

~Cling-rig~, stealing tankards from public-houses, &c.

~Clipper~, a fine fast-sailing vessel. Applied also as a term of
encomium to a handsome woman.

~Clipping~, excellent, very good. CLIPPER, anything showy or first-rate.

~Clock~, a watch. Watches are also distinguished by the terms “red
clock,” a gold watch, and “white clock,” a silver watch. Generally
modified into “red’un” and “white’un.”

~Clock~, “to know what’s O’CLOCK,” to be “up, down, fly and awake,” to
know everything about everything—a definition of knowingness in
general.—_See_ TIME O’ DAY.

~Clod-hopper~, a country clown.

~Cloud~, TO BE UNDER A, to be in difficulties, disgrace or disrepute; in
fact, to be in shady circumstances.

~Clout~, or RAG, a cotton pocket-handkerchief.—_Old Cant._ Now
“_clouts_” means a woman’s under-clothes, from the waist downwards,
_i.e._, petticoats when they are on the person; but the term is extended
to mean the whole unworn wardrobe. Probably St. Giles’s satire, having
reference to the fact that few women there possess a second gown.

~Clout~, an intentional heavy blow.

~Clover~, happiness, luck, a delightful position—from the supposed
extra enjoyment which attends cattle when they suddenly find their
quarters changed from a barren field to a meadow of clover. Among
betting men he who has arranged his wagerings so satisfactorily before
an event that he cannot possibly lose, and may win a good deal, is said
to be in clover, a phrase which is sometimes varied by the remark that
“he stands on velvet.” Any one who is provided for, so that he can look
forward to a term of ease and enjoyment for the rest of his life, is
also said to be in clover.

~Club~, in manœuvring troops, so to blunder in giving the word of
command that the soldiers get into a position from which they cannot
extricate themselves by ordinary tactical means. Young officers
frequently “CLUB” their men, and get consequently “wigged” by the
inspecting general.

~Clump~, to strike, to beat.—_Prov._

~Cly~, a pocket.—_Old Cant_ for to steal. A correspondent derives this
word from the _Old English_, CLEYES, claws; _Anglo-Saxon_, CLEA. This
pronunciation is still retained in Norfolk; thus, to CLY would mean to
pounce upon, to snatch.—_See_ FRISK. _Gael._, CLIAH (pronounced CLEE),
a basket.

~Cly-faker~, a pickpocket.

~Coach~, a private tutor. Originally University, but now general. Any
man who now trains or teaches another, or others, is called a coach. To
coach is to instruct as regards either physical or mental acquirements.
A private tutor is sometimes termed a RURAL COACH when he is not
connected with a college. At Rugby a flogging is termed a “coaching.”

~Coach-wheel~, or TUSHEROON, a crown-piece, or five shillings.

~Coal~, money; “post the COAL,” put down the money. The phrase was used
by Mr. Buckstone at the Theatrical Fund Dinner of 1863. From this is
derived the theatrical term COALING, profitable, very good, which an
actor will use if his part is full of good and telling speeches—thus,
“my part is full of COALING lines.” This term was used in the sporting
world long anterior to Mr. Buckstone’s speech. _See_ COAL.

~Coals~, “to haul (or pull) over the COALS,” to take to task, to scold.
Supposed by Jamieson to refer to the ordeal by fire. To “take one’s
coals in,” is a term used by sailors to express their having caught the
venereal disease. It means that they have gotten that which will keep
them hot for a good many months.

~Cobbing~, a punishment inflicted by sailors and soldiers among
themselves. _See_ Grose and Captain Marryat’s novels. A hand-saw is the
general instrument of punishment.

~Cock~, a familiar term of address; “jolly old COCK,” a jovial fellow,
“how are you, old COCK?” Frequently rendered nowadays, COCK-E-E, a
vulgar street salutation—probably a corruption of COCK-EYE. The latter
is frequently heard as a shout or street cry after a man or boy.

~Cock~, a smoking term; “COCKING a Broseley,” _i.e._, smoking a pipe.
Broseley in Shropshire is famous for “churchwardens.” A “COCK” is an
apocryphal story, generally, of a murder or elopement bawled about the
streets by the Seven Dials’ “patterers.”

~Cock~, a pugilistic term for a man who is knocked out of time. “Knocked
him a reg’lar COCK.” Sometimes used to signify knocked out of shape, as,
“Knocked him A-COCK,” probably connected with “cocked-hat shape.” A
horse who has been backed by the public, but who does not run, or,
running, does not persevere.

~Cock~, “to COCK your eye,” to shut or wink one eye, to make
“sheep’s-eyes.”

~Cock-a-hoop~, in high spirits. Possibly the idea is from the fact that,
if a cock wins a fight, he will mount on anything near, and crow lustily
and jubilantly. It is noticeable that under these circumstances a cock
always gets off the ground-level if he can.

~Cockalorum~, or COCKYLORUM, amplification of cock or cocky.

~Cock and bull story~, a long, rambling anecdote.—_See_ Peroration to
_Tristram Shandy_.

~Cock-and-hen-club~, a free and easy gathering, or “sing-song,” where
females are admitted as well as males.

~Cock-and-pinch~, the old-fashioned beaver hat, affected by “swells” and
“sporting gents” forty years ago—COCKED back and front, and PINCHED up
at the sides.

~Cock-a-wax~, an amplification of the simple term COCK, sometimes “Lad
of WAX,” originally applied to a cobbler, but now general.

~Cocked-hat-club~, the principal clique amongst the members of the
Society of Antiquaries, who virtually decide whether any person proposed
shall be admitted or not. The term comes from the “cocked-hat” placed
before the president at the sittings. There was another cocked-hat club
in London not many years back, which had nothing peculiar about it
beyond the fact that every member wore during club sittings, a
“fore-and-aft” cocked-hat. Otherwise the proceedings were of the most
ordinary kind.

~Cocked-hat-shaped~, shapeless: Anything which has been altered beyond
recognition, or any man who has been put completely _hors de combat_, is
said to have been knocked into a COCKED-HAT.

~Cocker~, “It is all right, according to Cocker,” meaning that
everything has been done in accordance with the present system of
figures. The phrase refers to the celebrated writing-master of Charles
II.’s time, whose Arithmetic, Dictionary, &c., were long the standard
authorities. The Arithmetic was first published in 1677-8, and, though
it reached more than sixty editions, is considered a very scarce book.
Professor de Morgan says that the main goodness of Cocker’s _Tutor_
consists in his adopting the abbreviated system of division; and
suggests that it became a proverbial representative of arithmetic from
Murphy’s farce of _The Apprentice_, 1756, in which the strong point of
the old merchant, Wingate, is his extreme reverence for Cocker and his
arithmetic. A curious fact may here be mentioned in connexion with this
saying. It has been stated, and very well proved, that many words
popular in Shakspeare’s time, and now obsolete in this country, are
still in every-day use in the older English settlements of North
America. The original compiler of this work was surprised, when
travelling through Western Canada, to find that, instead of the renowned
Cocker, the people appealed to another and more learned authority.
“According to Gunter,” is a phrase in continual Transatlantic use. This
scientific worthy invented the sector in 1606; and in 1623, about the
time of the great Puritan exodus to North America, he brought out his
famous _Rule of Proportion_. This was popularly known as Gunter’s
Proportion, or _Gunter’s Line_, and the term soon became a vulgar
standard of appeal in cases of doubt or dispute.

~Cock-eye~, a term of opprobrium often applied to one that squints.

~Cockles~, “to rejoice the COCKLES of one’s heart,” a vulgar phrase
implying great pleasure. Also, to “warm one’s COCKLES,” said of any hot,
well-spiced drink, taken in cold weather. COCKLES altogether seem to be
an imaginary portion—of great importance—in the internal economy of
the human frame.

~Cockney~, a native of London. Originally, a spoilt or effeminate boy,
derived from COCKERING, or foolishly petting a person, rendering him of
soft and luxurious manners. Halliwell states, in his admirable essay
upon the word, that “some writers trace the word with much probability
to the imaginary land of COCKAYGNE, the lubber land of the olden times.”
Grose gives Minsheu’s absurd but comical derivation:—A citizen of
London being in the country, and hearing a horse neigh, exclaimed,
“Lord! how that horse laughs!” A bystander informed him that the noise
was called neighing. The next morning when the cock crowed, the citizen,
to show that he had not forgotten what was told him, cried out, “Do you
hear how the COCK NEIGHS?”—_See_ MARE’S NEST.

~Cock of the walk~, a master spirit, head of a party. Places where
poultry are fed are called WALKS, and the barn door cocks invariably
fight for the supremacy till one has obtained it. At schools where this
phrase was originally much used, it has been diminished to “COCK” only.

~Cock one’s toes~, to die. Otherwise “turn-up one’s toes.”

~Cock-robin shop~, a small printing-office, where cheap and nasty work
is done and low wages are paid.

~Cocks~, fictitious narratives, in verse or prose, of murders, fires,
and terrible accidents, sold in the streets as true accounts. The man
who hawks them, a patterer, often changes the scene of the awful event
to suit the taste of the neighbourhood he is trying to delude. Possibly
a corruption of _cook_, a cooked statement, or maybe “the story of a
cock and a bull” may have had something to do with the term.
Improvements in newspapers, especially in those published in the
evening, and increased scepticism on the part of the public, have
destroyed this branch of a once-flourishing business.

~Cockshy~, a game at fairs and races, where trinkets are set upon
sticks, and for one penny three throws at them are accorded, the thrower
keeping whatever he knocks off. From the ancient game of throwing or
“shying” at live cocks. Any prominent person abused in the newspapers is
said to be a common COCKSHY.

~Cocksure~, certain.

~Cocky~, pert, saucy.

~Cocoa-nut~, the head. A pugilistic term. Also, when anything is
explained to a man for the first time, it is not unusual for him to say,
“Ah, that accounts for the milk in the cocoa-nut”—a remark which has
its origin in a clever but not very moral story.

~Cocum~, shrewdness, ability, luck; “Jack’s got COCUM, he’s safe to get
on, he is,”—viz., he starts under favourable circumstances; “to fight
COCUM” is to be wily and cautious. Allied perhaps to the Scottish KEEK,
_German_, GUCKEN, to peep or pry into.

~Cod~, to hoax, to take a “rise” out of one. Used as a noun, a fool.

~Coddam~, a public-house game, much affected by medical students and
cabmen, generally three on each side. The game is “simplicity itself,”
but requires a great amount of low cunning and peculiar mental
ingenuity. It consists in guessing in which of the six hands displayed
on the table, a small piece of marked money lies hid. If the guesser
“brings it home,” his side takes the “piece,” and the centre man “works”
it. If the guess is wrong, a chalk is taken to the holders, who again
secrete the coin. Great fun is to be obtained from this game when it is
properly played.

~Codds~, the “poor brethren” of the Charter House. In _The Newcomes_,
Thackeray writes, “The Cistercian lads call these old gentlemen CODDS; I
know not wherefore.” A probable abbreviation of CODGER.

~Codger~, or COGER, an old man; “a rum old CODGER,” a curious old
fellow. CODGER is sometimes used as synonymous with CADGER, and then
signifies a person who gets his living in a questionable manner.
“COGERS,” the name of a debating society, formerly held in Shoe Lane,
Fleet Street, and still in existence. The term is probably a corruption
of COGITATORS.

~Coffee-Shop~, a watercloset, or house of office.

~Cog~, to cheat at dice.—_Shakspeare._ Also, to agree with, as one
cog-wheel does with another, to crib from another’s book, as schoolboys
often do. This is called “cogging over.”

~Cogged~, loaded like false dice. Any one who has been hocussed or
cheated is sometimes said to have been COGGED.

~Coin~, “to post the COIN”—sometimes “post the coal”—a sporting phrase
meaning to make a deposit of money for a match of any kind.

~Cold blood~, a house licensed for the sale of beer “NOT to be drunk on
the premises.”

~Cold coffee~, misfortune; sometimes varied to COLD GRUEL. An unpleasant
return for a proffered kindness is sometimes called COLD COFFEE.—_Sea._

~Cold coffee~, an Oxford synonym for a “sell,” which _see_.

~Cold cook~, an undertaker. Cold cook’s shop, an undertaker’s.

~Cold meat~, a corpse. COLD-MEAT BOX, a coffin.

~Cold meat train~, the last train at night by which officers can reach
Aldershot per South Western Railway. So called because by this train
corpses are often conveyed on account of the Necropolis Company to
Woking.

~Cold shoulder~, “to show or give any one the COLD SHOULDER” is to “cut”
in a modified form, to assume a distant manner towards anybody, to
evince a desire to cease acquaintanceship. Sometimes termed “COLD
SHOULDER of mutton.”

~Colfabias~, a Latinized Irish phrase signifying the closet of decency,
applied as a slang term to a place of resort in Trinity College, Dublin.

~Collar~, “out of COLLAR,” _i.e._, out of place, no work. Probably a
variation of the metaphorical expressions, “in, or out of harness,”
_i.e._, in or out of work—the horse being in collar when harnessed for
his work. COLLAR work is any very hard work, from the expression among
drivers. Any uphill journey is said to be all “COLLAR work” for the
horses.

~Collar~, to seize, to lay hold of. Thieves’ slang, _i.e._, to steal.

~Collar and elbow~, a term for a peculiar style of wrestling—the
Cornwall and Devon style.

~Collections~, the College examinations at the end of each term, when
undergraduates wear white ties and bands, and are trotted through the
subjects of the term’s lecture. These are the occasions when the dons
administer reproof or advice on the conduct of each individual
undergrad.—_Oxford University._

~Collogue~, to conspire, talk mysteriously together in low tones, plot
mischief. Connected with “colloquy” or “colleague.” Maybe mixture of
both.

~Colly-wobbles~, the stomach-ache, a person’s bowels,—supposed by many
to be the seat of feeling and nutrition.—_Devonshire._

~Colour~, complexion, tint; “I’ve not seen the COLOUR of his money,”
_i.e._, he has never paid me any. In fortune-telling by cards, a
_diamond colour_ is the fairest; _heart-colour_, fair, but not so fair
as the last; _club colour_, rather dark; _spade colour_, an extremely
swarthy complexion.

~Colour~, a handkerchief worn by each of the supporters of a
professional athlete on the day of a match, so as to distinguish them
from the partizans of the other side. The professional chooses his
colours, and his backers, and as many of the general public as can be
persuaded to do so, take one each to wear on the eventful day, the
understanding being that the man is to be paid, say, a guinea if he
wins, and nothing if he loses. Some of these handkerchiefs used to be,
in the palmy days of pugilism and professional rowing on the Thames,
very fine specimens of work; but as their purveyors expected to be paid
whether they won or lost, and as the price was generally about four
times the intrinsic value, colours are rather shyly dealt with now. The
custom is, however, a very ancient one, and such men as Tom Sayers, Tom
King, Harry Kelley, and Bob Chambers have, even in these degenerate
days, received very large sums for their winning colours.

~Colt~, a murderous weapon, formed by slinging a small shot to the end
of a rather stiff piece of rope. It is the original of the misnamed
“life-preserver.”

~Colt~, a person who sits as juryman for the first time. In Cork an
operative baker who does not belong to the union.

~Colt~, a professional cricketer during his first season. From the best
colts in the annual match are selected new county players.

~Colt~, to fine a new juryman a sum to be spent in drink, by way of
“wetting” his office; to make a person free of a new place, which is
done by his standing treat, and submitting to be struck on the sole of
the foot with a piece of board.

~Colt’s tooth~, elderly persons of juvenile tastes are said to have a
COLT’S TOOTH, _i.e._, a desire to shed their teeth once more, to see
life over again.

~Comb-cut~, mortified, disgraced, “down on one’s luck.”—_See_ CUT.

~Come~, a slang verb used in many phrases; “Aint he COMING IT?” _i.e._,
is he not proceeding at a great rate? “Don’t COME TRICKS here,” “don’t
COME THE OLD SOLDIER over me,” _i.e._, we are aware of your practices,
and “twig” your manœuvre. COMING IT STRONG, exaggerating, going ahead,
the opposite of “drawing it mild.” COMING IT also means informing or
disclosing. Also, in pugilistic phraseology, to COME IT means to show
fear; and in this respect, as well as in that of giving information, the
expression “COME IT” is best known to the lower and most dangerous
classes.

~Come down~, to pay down.

~Commemoration~, the end of Lent term at Oxford, when honorary degrees
are conferred and certain prizes given, and when men have friends “up.”

~Commission~, a shirt.—_Ancient Cant._ _Italian_, CAMICIA.

    “As from our beds, we doe oft cast our eyes,
    Cleane linnen yeelds a shirt before we rise,
    Which is a garment _shifting_ in condition;
    And in the _canting tongue_ is a COMMISSION.
    In weale or woe, in joy or dangerous drifts,
    A _shirt_ will put a man unto his _shifts_.”

        —_Taylor’s Works_, 1630.

For further particulars, _see_ CAMESA.

~Commister~, a chaplain or clergyman.—Originally _Old Cant_.

~Common sewer~, a DRAIN,—vulgar equivalent for a drink.

~Commons~, the allowance of anything sent out of the buttery or kitchen.
“A COMMONS of bread,” or “of cheese,” for instance.—_University._ SHORT
COMMONS (derived from the University slang term), a scanty meal, a
scarcity.

~Competition wallah~, one who entered the Indian Civil Service by
passing a competitive examination.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Compo~, a sailor’s term for his monthly advance of wages.

~Comprador~, a purveyor, an agent.—_Originally Spanish, now
Anglo-Chinese._

~Concaves and convexes~, a pack of cards contrived for cheating, by
cutting all the cards from the two to the seven concave, and all from
the eight to the king convex. Then by cutting the pack breadthwise a
convex card is cut, and by cutting it lengthwise a concave is
secured.—_See_ LONGS AND SHORTS.

[Illustration]

~Conjee~, a kind of gruel made of rice.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Conk~, a nose. Possibly from the _Latin_, CONCHA, a shell. _Greek_,
κόγχη—hence anything hollow. Somewhat of a parallel may be found in the
_Latin_, TESTA, an earthenware pot, a shell, and in later _Latin_, a
_skull_; from whence the _French_ TESTE, or TÊTE, head. CONKY, having a
projecting or remarkable nose. The first Duke of Wellington was
frequently termed “Old CONKY” in satirical papers and caricatures.

~Connaught Rangers~, the Eighty-eighth Regiment of Foot in the British
Army.

~Conshun’s price~, fair terms, without extortion. Probably conscience
price.—_Anglo-Chinese._

~Constable~, “to overrun the CONSTABLE,” to exceed one’s income, or get
deep in debt. The origin of this phrase is unknown, but its use is very
general.

~Constitutional~, a walk, or other exercise taken for the benefit of the
health.

~Consumah~, a butler.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Contango~, among stockbrokers and jobbers, is a certain sum paid for
accommodating a buyer or seller, by carrying the engagement to pay money
or deliver shares over to the next account day.

~Continuations~, coverings for the legs, whether trousers or breeches. A
word belonging to the same squeamish, affected family as unmentionables,
inexpressibles, &c.

~Convey~, to steal; “CONVEY, the wise it call.”

~Conveyancer~, a pickpocket. Shakspeare uses the cant expression
CONVEYER, a thief. The same term is also French slang.

~Cooey~, the Australian bush-call, now not unfrequently heard in the
streets of London.

~Cook~, a term well known in the Bankruptcy Courts, in reference to
accounts that have been meddled with, or COOKED, by the bankrupt; also
to form a balance-sheet from general trade inferences; stated by a
correspondent to have been first used in reference to the celebrated
alteration of the accounts of the Eastern Counties Railway, by George
Hudson, the Railway King. Any unfair statements of accounts or reports
are now said to be COOKED.

~Cook~, in artistic circles, to dodge up a picture. Artists say that a
picture will not COOK when it is excellent and unconventional, and
beyond specious imitation.

~Cook one’s goose~, to kill or ruin a person.—_North._

~Cooler~, a glass of porter as a wind up, after drinking spirits and
water. This form of drinking is sometimes called “putting the beggar on
the gentleman.”

~Coolie~, a soldier, in allusion to the Hindoo COOLIES, or day
labourers.

~Coon~, abbreviation of racoon.—_American._ A GONE COON—_ditto_, one
in an awful fix, past praying for. This expression is said to have
originated in the first American war with a spy, who dressed himself in
a racoon skin, and ensconced himself in a tree. An English rifleman
taking him for a veritable coon, levelled his piece at him, upon which
he exclaimed, “Don’t shoot, I’ll come down of myself, I know I’m a GONE
COON.” The Yankees say the Britisher was so “flummuxed,” that he flung
down his rifle and “made tracks” for home. The phrase is pretty general
in England. [There is one difficulty about this story—How big was the
man who dressed himself in a racoon skin?]

~Cooper~, “stout half-and-half,” _i.e._, half stout and half porter.
Derived from the coopers at breweries being allowed so much stout and so
much porter a day, which they take mixed.

~Cooper~, to destroy, spoil, settle, or finish. COOPERED, spoilt, “done
up,” synonymous with the Americanism caved in, fallen in, ruined. The
vagabonds’ hieroglyph ▽, chalked by them on gate posts and houses,
signifies that the place has been spoilt by too many tramps calling
there.

~Cooper~, to forge, or imitate in writing; “COOPER a monniker,” to forge
a signature.

~Cooter~, “a sovereign.”—_See_ COUTER. Gipsy, CUTA.

~Cop~, to seize or lay hold of anything unpleasant; used in a similar
sense to _catch_ in the phrase “to COP (or catch) a beating.” “To get
COPT,” is to be taken by the police. Probable contraction of Lat.
_capere_.

~Cop~, beware, take care. A contraction of COPRADOR.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Coper~, properly HORSE-COUPER, a Scotch horse-dealer,—used to denote a
dishonest one. COPING, like jockeying, is suggestive of all kinds of
trickery.

~Copper~, a policeman, _i.e._, one who COPS, which _see_.

~Copper~, a halfpenny. COPPERS, mixed pence.

~Coppernose~, a nose which is supposed to show a partiality on its
owner’s part for strong drink. Synonymous with “jolly nose.”
Grog-blossoms are the jewels often set in a jolly nose.

~Copus~, a Cambridge drink, consisting of ale combined with spices, and
varied by spirits, wines, &c. Corruption of HIPPOCRAS.

~Corduroy roads~, an American term for the rough roads made by simply
laying logs along a clearing.

~Corinthianism~, a term derived from the classics, much in vogue some
years ago, implying pugilism, high life, “sprees,” roystering,
&c.—Shakspeare, 1 _Hen. IV._ ii. 4. The immorality of _Corinth_ was
proverbial in Greece. Κορινθιάζεσθαι, to _Corinthianize_, indulge in
the company of courtezans, was a Greek slang expression. Hence the
proverb—

    Οὐ παντὸς ἀνδρὸς εἰς Κόρινθον ἔσθ᾿ ὁ πλοῦς;

and _Horace_, Epist. lib. 1, xvii. 36—

    “Non cuivis hommi contingit adire Corinthum,”

in allusion to the spoliation practised by the “hetæræ” on those who
visited them. Pierce Egan, in his _Life in London_, is responsible for a
deal of the modern use of this word; and after him _Bell’s Life_, as the
oracle of Corinthian sport, was not idle.

~Cork~, a broken man, a bankrupt. Probably intended to refer to his
lightness, as being without “ballast.”

~Cork~, “to draw a CORK,” to give a bloody nose.—_Pugilistic._

~Corkage~, money charged when persons at an hotel provide their own
wine—sixpence being charged for each “cork” drawn.

~Corked~, said of wine which tastes of cork, from being badly decanted,
or which has lost flavour from various other obvious causes.

~Corker~, “that’s a CORKER,” _i.e._, that settles the question, or
closes the discussion.

~Corks~, a butler. Derivation very obvious.

~Corks~, money; “how are you off for CORKS?” a sailors’ term of a very
expressive kind, denoting the means of “keeping afloat.”

~Corned~, drunk or intoxicated. Possibly from soaking or pickling
oneself like CORNED beef.

~Corner~, “the CORNER,” Tattersall’s famous horse repository and betting
rooms, so called from the fact of its situation, which was at Hyde Park
Corner. Though Tattersall’s has been removed some distance, to Albert
Gate, it is still known to the older habitués of the Subscription Room
as “the CORNER.”

~Cornered~, hemmed in a corner, placed in a position from which there is
no escape.

~Corner-man~, the end singer of a corps of Ethiopian or nigger
minstrels. There are two corner men, one generally plays the bones and
the other the tambourine. Corner-men are the grotesques of a minstrel
company.

~Corn in Egypt~, a popular expression which means a plentiful supply of
materials for a dinner, &c., or a good supply of money. Its origin is of
course Biblical.

~Corporation~, the protuberant front of an obese person. Probably from
the old announcements which used to be made, and are made now in some
towns where improvements are made by the municipal authorities, “Widened
at the expense of the CORPORATION.”

~Corpse~, to stick fast in the dialogue; to confuse, or put out the
actors by making a mistake.—_Theatrical._

~Cosh~, a neddy, a life-preserver; any short, loaded bludgeon.

~Cossack~, a policeman.

~Costard~, the head. A very old word, generally used in connexion with
“cracked.”

~Coster~, the short and slang rendering of “costermonger,” or
“costardmonger,” who was originally an apple-seller. COSTERING, _i.e._,
costermongering, acting as a costermonger would.

~Costermonger~, a street seller of fish, fruit, vegetables, poultry,
&c. The London costermongers number more than 30,000. They form a
distinct class, occupying whole neighbourhoods, and were at one time cut
off from the rest of metropolitan society by their low habits, general
improvidence, pugnacity, love of gambling, total want of education,
disregard for lawful marriage ceremonies, and their use of a peculiar
slang language. They have changed a good deal of this, though, now.
COSTERMONGER _aliter_ COSTARDMONGER, _i.e._, an apple-seller. In Nares’s
_Glossary_ (Ed. H. & W.) they are said to have been frequently Irish.
So, Ben Jonson—

    “Her father was an Irish COSTAR-MONGER.”

        _Alchym._, iv. x.

    “In England, sir, troth I ever laugh when I think on ’t,
    ----Why, sir, there all the COSTER-MONGERS are Irish.”

        _2 P. Hen. IV., O. Pl._, iii. 375.

Their noisy manners are alluded to in Beaumont and Fletcher’s _Scornful
Lady_, iv. I.

    “And then he’ll rail like a rude COSTER-MONGER
    That school-boys had couzened of his apples,
    As loud and senseless.”

~Cotton~, to like, adhere to, or agree with any person; “to COTTON on to
a man,” to attach yourself to him, or fancy him, literally, to stick to
him as cotton would. _Vide_ Bartlett, who claims it as an Americanism,
and Halliwell, who terms it an archaism; also _Bacchus and Venus_, 1737.

    “Her heart’s as hard as taxes, and as bad;
    She does not even COTTON to her dad.”

        _Halliday and Lawrance_, _Kenilworth Burlesque_.

~Cotton Lord~, a Manchester manufacturer.

~Cottonopolis~, Manchester. A term much in use among the reporters of
the sporting press engaged in that locality.

~Council-of-ten~, the toes of a man who turns his feet inward.

~Counter~, to hit back, to exchange blows. A cross COUNTER is a blow
with the right hand given in exchange for one with the left, the
counterer preferring to strike rather than to “stop” the
blow.—_Pugilistic._

~Counter-jumper~, a shopman, a draper’s assistant.

~Country-captain~, a spatch-cocked fowl, sprinkled with curry-powder. A
favourite breakfast dish with the captains of country-ships.—_Indian._

~Country-ship~, a ship belonging to the East Indies, and trading from
port to port in that country.

~County-crop~ (_i.e._, COUNTY-PRISON CROP), haircut close and round, as
if guided by a basin—an indication of having been in prison. Since
short hair has become fashionable the expression has fallen somewhat
into disuse. In the times when long hair was worn, a man with his hair
cut as described was said to have had it done with a knife and fork.

~Couple-beggar~, a degraded person, who officiated as a clergyman in
performing marriages in the Fleet Prison.

~Couter~, a sovereign. HALF-A-COUTER, half-a-sovereign. From the
Danubian-gipsy word CUTA, a gold coin.

~Cove~, or COVEY, a boy or man of any age or station. A term generally
preceded by an expressive adjective, thus a “flash COVE,” a “rum COVE,”
a “downy COVE,” &c. The feminine, COVESS, was once popular, but it has
fallen into disuse. Originally ancient cant (temp. Henry VII.), COFE, or
CUFFIN, altered in Decker’s time to COVE. _See Witts’ Recreations_,
1654: “there’s a gentry-COVE here,” _i.e._, a gentleman. Probably
connected with CUIF, which, in the North of England, signifies a lout or
awkward fellow. Amongst Negroes, CUFFEE.

~Coventry~, “to send a man to COVENTRY,” not to speak to or notice him.
Coventry was one of those towns in which the privilege of practising
most trades was anciently confined to certain privileged persons, as the
freemen, &c. Hence a stranger stood little chance of custom, or
countenance, and “to send a man to COVENTRY” came to be equivalent to
putting him out of the pale of society.

~Cover-down~, a tossing coin with a false cover, enabling either head or
tail to be shown, according as the cover is left on or taken off. The
cover is more generally called a CAP. This style of cheating is now
obsolete. A man who cannot manage to cheat at tossing without machinery
is a sorry rogue.

~Cowan~, a sneak, an inquisitive or prying person. _Greek_, κύων, a dog.
Term given by Freemasons to all uninitiated persons. Used in Anderson’s
_Constitutions_, edit. 1769, p. 97. If derived from κύων, its use was
probably suggested by such passages in the N. T. as Matt. vii. 6, and
Phil. iii. 2. The Moslems apply dog in a similar manner. It is probably
Oriental. Other authorities say it is from COWAN, or KIRWAN, a Scottish
word signifying a man who builds rough stone walls without mortar—a man
who, though he builds, is not a practical mason.

~Cow-cow~, to be very angry, to scold or reprimand
violently.—_Anglo-Chinese._

~Cow-hocked~, clumsy about the ankles; with large or awkward feet.

~Cow-lick~, the term given to the lock of hair which costermongers and
tramps usually twist forward from the ear; a large greasy curl upon the
cheek, seemingly licked into shape. These locks are also called NUMBER
SIXES, from their usual shape. The opposite of NEWGATE-KNOCKER, which
_see_.

~Cow’s grease~, butter.

~Coxy-loxy~, good-tempered, drunk.—_Norfolk._

~Crab~, a disagreeable old person. Name of a wild and sour fruit.

~Crab~, “to catch a CRAB,” to fall backwards by missing a stroke in
rowing. From the crab-like or sprawling appearance of the man when in
the bottom of the boat.

~Crab~, to offend, or insult; to expose or defeat a robbery, to inform
against. CRAB, in the sense of “to offend,” is _Old English_.

    “If I think one thing and speak another,
    I will both CRAB Christ and our Ladie His mother.”

        _Packman’s Paternoster._

~Crabs~, in dicing, a pair of aces.

~Crabshells~, or TROTTER-CASES, shoes.—_See_ CARTS.

~Crack~, the favourite horse in a race. Steeplechase and hunting CRACKS
have been made the subjects of well-known pictures, and “the gallops of
the CRACKS” is a prominent line in the sporting papers.

~Crack~, first-rate, excellent; “a CRACK HAND,” an adept; a “CRACK
article,” a good one. “A CRACK regiment,” a fashionable one.—_Old._

~Crack~, dry firewood.—_Modern Gipsy._

~Crack~, “in a CRACK (of the finger and thumb),” in a moment.

~Crack~, to break into a house; “CRACK A CRIB,” to commit burglary.

~Crack a bottle~, to drink. Shakspeare uses CRUSH in the same slang
sense.

~Cracked up~, penniless or ruined.

~Cracking a crust~, rubbing along in the world. CRACKING A TIDY CRUST,
means doing very well. This is a very common expression among the lower
orders.

~Crackle~, or CRACKLING, the scored rind on a roast leg or loin of pork;
hence applied to the velvet bars on the gowns of the students at St.
John’s College, Cambridge, long called “Hogs,” and the covered bridge
which connects one of the courts with the grounds, Isthmus of Suez
(SUES, _Lat._ SUS, a swine).

~Cracksman~, a burglar, _i.e._, the man who CRACKS.

~Crack up~, to boast or praise.—_Ancient English._

~Cram~, to lie or deceive, implying to fill up or CRAM a person with
false stories; to impart or acquire learning quickly, to “grind” or
prepare for an examination.

~Crammer~, one skilled in rapidly preparing others for an examination.
One in the habit of telling lies.

~Crammer~, a lie.

~Cranky~, foolish, idiotic, rickety, capricious (not confined to
persons). _Ancient cant_, CRANKE, simulated sickness. _German_, KRANK,
sickly. A CRANK or CRANKY vessel is one which pitches very much.

~Crap~, to ease oneself by evacuation.

~Crapping case~, or KEN, the water-closet. Generally called
CRAPPING-CASTLE.

~Crawler~, a mean, contemptible, sycophantic fellow. Also a cab which is
driven slowly along while its driver looks out for a fare. Crawling is
by recent statute a punishable offence.

~Crawly mawly~, in an ailing, weakly, or sickly state.

~Craw thumper~, a Roman Catholic. Compare BRISKET-BEATER.

~Cream of the valley~, gin; as opposed to or distinguished from
“mountain dew,” whisky.

~Crib~, house, public or otherwise; lodgings, apartments; a situation.
Very general in the latter sense.

~Crib~, to steal or purloin; to appropriate small things.

~Crib~, a literal translation of a classic author.—_University._

~Crib biter~, an inveterate grumbler; properly said of a horse which has
this habit, a sign of its bad digestion.

~Cribbage-faced~, marked with the small-pox, full of holes like a
cribbage-board. Otherwise crumpet-face.

~Crikey~, profane exclamation of astonishment; “Oh, CRIKEY, you don’t
say so!” corruption of “O Christ!” Sometimes varied by “O crimes!”

~Cripple~, a bent sixpence.

~Cripple~, an awkward or clumsy person. Also one of dull wits.

~Croak~, to die—from the gurgling sound a person makes when the breath
of life is departing.

~Croaker~, one who takes a desponding view of everything, a misanthrope;
an alarmist. From the croaking of a raven.—_Ben Jonson._

~Croaker~, a beggar.

~Croaker~, a dying person beyond hope; a corpse. The latter is generally
called a “stiff’un.”

~Croaks~, last dying speeches, and murderers’ confessions.

~Crocodiles’ tears~, the tears of a hypocrite. An ancient phrase,
introduced into this country by Mandeville, or other early English
traveller, who believed that the crocodile made a weeping noise to
attract travellers, and then devoured them. See Shakspeare’s use of the
term in _Othello_.

~Crocus~, or CROAKUS, a quack or travelling doctor; CROCUS-CHOVEY, a
chemist’s shop.

~Crone~, a termagant or malicious old woman. CRONY, an intimate friend.

~Crooked~, a term used among dog-stealers and the “fancy” generally, to
denote anything stolen. “Got on the CROOK” is exchangeable with “Got on
the cross,” CROOK and cross generally being synonymous.

~Crooky~, to hang on to, to lead, to walk arm-in-arm; to court or pay
addresses to a girl.

~Cropped~, hanged. Sometimes topped. “May I be topped.”

~Cropper~, a heavy fall, a decided failure. Term originally used in the
hunting-field, but now general, and not at all confined to physical
matters.

~Cropper~, “to go a CROPPER,” or “to come a CROPPER,” _i.e._, to fail
badly.

~Croppie~, a person who has had his hair cut, or CROPPED, in prison.
Formerly those who had been CROPPED (_i.e._, had their ears cut off and
their noses slit) by the public executioner were called CROPPIES, then
the Puritans received the reversion of the title.

~Crop up~, to turn up in the course of conversation. “It CROPPED UP
while we were speaking.”

~Cross~, a deception—two persons pretending hostility or indifference
to each other, being all the while in concert for the purpose of
deceiving a third. In the sporting world a CROSS is an arrangement made
between two men that one shall win without reference to relative merits.
This is sometimes done with the backer’s consent for the public benefit,
at other times a backer is himself the sufferer, the men having “put
some one in to lay,” according to instructions.—_See_ DOUBLE CROSS.

~Cross~, a general term amongst thieves expressive of their plundering
profession, the opposite of square. “To get anything on the CROSS” is to
obtain it surreptitiously. “CROSS-FANNING in a crowd,” robbing persons
of their scarf-pins, so called from the peculiar position of the arms.
This style of thieving is not confined to the conveying of scarf-pins.
CROSSMAN, a thief, or one who lives by dishonest practices.

~Cross.~—For not paying his term bills to the bursar (treasurer), or
for cutting chapels, or lectures, or other offences, the undergrad can
be “CROSSED” at the buttery, or kitchen, or both, _i.e._, a CROSS is put
against his name by the Don, who wishes to see him, or to punish him. Of
course it is easy to get one’s buttery commons out in some one else’s
name, and to order dinner in from the confectioner’s. The porter is
supposed to allow no dinners to be sent in, but, between his winking and
a little disguise, it is possible. As another instance, a barrel of beer
will not be admitted; but if it is in a hamper it will pass!—_Oxford
University._

~Cross-buttock~, an unexpected fling down or repulse; from a peculiar
throw practised by wrestlers.

~Cross cove and molisher~, a man and woman who live by thieving.

~Cross-crib~, a house frequented by thieves.

~Crossed~, prohibited from taking food from the buttery.—_University._

~Crow~, or COCK-CROW, to exult over another’s abasement, as a
fighting-cock does over his vanquished adversary.

~Crow~, “a regular CROW,” a success, a stroke of luck,—equivalent to a
FLUKE.

~Crow~, one who watches whilst another commits a theft, a confederate in
a robbery. The CROW looks to see that the way is clear, whilst the
SNEAK, his partner, commits the depredation.

~Crow~, “I have a CROW to pick with you,” _i.e._, an explanation to
demand, a disagreeable matter to settle. Sometimes the article picked is
supposed to be a bone.

~Crowsfeet~, wrinkles which gather in the corners of the eyes of old or
dissipated people.

~Crug~, food. Christ’s Hospital boys apply it only to bread.

~Crumbs~, “to pick up one’s CRUMBS,” to begin to have an appetite after
an illness; to improve in health, circumstances, &c., after a loss
thereof.

~Crummy~, fat, plump.—_North._ In London street slang, lousy.

~Crummy-doss~, a lousy or filthy bed.

~Crumpet-face~, a face pitted with small-pox marks.

~Crunch~, to crush. Perhaps from the sound of teeth grinding against
each other.

~Crush~, to run or decamp rapidly. CRUSH DOWN SIDES, run to a place of
safety, or the appointed rendezvous.—_North Country Cant._

~Crusher~, a policeman.

~Crushing~, excellent, first-rate.

~Crusty~, ill-tempered, petulant, morose.—_Old_, said to be a
corruption of the _Anglo-Norman_ CORUSEUX.

~Cub~, a mannerless uncouth lout.—_See_ UNLICKED.

~Cubitopolis~, an appellation, originally given by Londoners to the
Warwick and Eccleston Square districts. From the name of the builders.

~Cue~, properly the last word spoken by one actor, it being the CUE for
the other to reply. “Very often an actor knows nothing of a piece beyond
his own lines and the CUES.”

~Cull~, a man or boy.—_Old Cant._ RUM CULL, the manager of a theatre.

~Cullet~, broken glass. _French_, CUEILLETTE, a gathering or collection.

~Culling~, or CULING, stealing from the carriages at racecourses.

~Cully gorger~, a companion, a brother actor.—_Theatrical._ _See_
GORGER.

~Culver-headed~, weak and stupid.

~Cummer~, a gossip or acquaintance.

~Cumshaw~, a present or bribe.—_Anglo-Chinese._

~Cupboard-headed~, an expressive designation of one whose head is both
wooden and hollow.—_Norfolk._

~Cupboard-love~, affection arising from interested motives.

    “A CUPBOARD LOVE is seldom true;
    A love sincere is found in few.”—_Poor Robin._

Cupboard is the fount-spring of the love supposed to exist among
policemen for the cooks upon their beats.

~Cup-tosser~, a person who professes to tell fortunes by examining the
grounds in tea or coffee cups. A cup or goblet, however, is the old
mystic symbol of a juggler. _French_, JOUEUR DE GOBELET.

~Cure~, an odd person; a contemptuous term, abridged from CURIOSITY,
which was formerly the favourite expression. The word cure, as
originally applied, was London street slang, and was, as just stated, an
abbreviation of curiosity, or, more correctly, of curious or queer
fellow. Of late years it has, however, been used to denote a funny,
humorous person, who can give and receive chaff.

~Curios~, a corruption of “curiosities;” any articles of vertu brought
from abroad. Used by naval and military travellers and others.

~Currency~, persons born in Australia are there termed CURRENCY, while
natives of England are termed STERLING. The allusion is to the
difference between colonial and imperial moneys, which it may be as well
to remark have no difference so far as actual value is concerned.

~Curse~, anything worthless. Corruption of the _Old English_ word KERSE,
a small sour wild cherry; _French_, CERISE; _German_, KIRSCH. _Vision of
Piers Ploughman_:—

    “Wisdom and witt nowe is _not worth_ a KERSE,
    But if it be carded with cootis as clothers
    Kembe their woole.”

The expression “not worth a CURSE,” used frequently nowadays, is
therefore not properly profane, though it is frequently intensified by a
profane expletive. Horne Tooke says from KERSE, or CRESS. The expression
“not worth a tinker’s CURSE,” may or may not have arisen from
misapplication of the word’s origin, though as now used it certainly
means curse in its usual sense. Tinkers do curse, unfortunately, and it
will take a good deal of school-board work to educate them out of it, as
well as a fair amount of time. The phrase “not worth a tinker’s damn,”
is evidently a variation of this, unless indeed it should be spelt
“dam,” and used as a reference to the general worthlessness of the wives
and mothers of tinkers. This latter is merely offered to those who are
speculative in such matters, and is not advanced as an opinion.

~Curse of Scotland~, the Nine of Diamonds. Various hypotheses have been
set up as to this appellation—that it was the card on which the
“Butcher Duke” wrote a cruel order with respect to the rebels after the
battle of Culloden; that the diamonds are the nine lozenges in the arms
of Dalrymple, Earl of Stair, detested for his share in the Massacre of
Glencoe; that it is a corruption of Cross of Scotland, the nine diamonds
being arranged somewhat after the fashion of a St. Andrew’s Cross. The
first supposition is evidently erroneous, for in Dr. Houston’s Memoirs
of his own Lifetime, 1747, p. 92, the Jacobite ladies are stated to have
nicknamed the Nine of Diamonds “the Justice Clerk,” after the rebellion
of 1715, in allusion to the Lord Justice-Clerk Ormistone, who, for his
severity in suppressing it, was called the Curse of Scotland. Gules a
cross of lozenges were also the arms of Colonel Packer, who attended
Charles I. on the scaffold, and commanded in Scotland afterwards with
great severity.—_See_ Chatto on the _Origin and History of Playing
Cards_, p. 267. The most probable explanation is, that in the game of
Pope Joan the nine of diamonds is the POPE, of whom the Scotch have an
especial horror.

~Curtail~, to cut off. Originally a Cant word—vide _Hudibras_, and
_Bacchus and Venus_, 1737. Evidently derived from the French _court
tailler_.

~Cushion~, to hide or conceal.

~Cushion-smiter~, polite rendering of tub-thumper, a clergyman, a
preacher.

~Cushmawaunee~, never mind. Sailors and soldiers who have been in India
frequently say—

    “CUSHMAWAUNEE,
    If we cannot get arrack,
    We must drink pawnee.”

        _Anglo-Indian._

~Customer~, synonymous with CHAP, a fellow; “a rum CUSTOMER,” _i.e._, a
man likely to turn the tables on any one who attacked him, and therefore
better be let alone, or very warily proceeded with; an “odd fish,” or
curious person.—_Shakspeare._

~Customhouse-officer~, an aperient pill.

~Cut~, to run away, move off quickly; to cease doing anything; CUT AND
RUN, to quit work, or occupation, and start off at once—_Sea_ phrase,
“CUT the cable and RUN before the wind;” to CUT DIDOES, synonymous with
to CUT CAPERS; CUT A DASH, make a show; CUT A CAPER, to dance or show
off in a strange manner; CUT A FIGURE, to make either a good or bad
appearance; CUT IT, desist, be quiet, go away, leave what you are doing
and run; CUT IT SHORT, cease being prolix, “make short work” of what you
have in hand; CUT OUT, to excel, thus in affairs of gallantry one Adonis
is said to CUT the other out in the affections of the wished-for
lady—_Sea_ phrase, from CUTTING out a ship from the enemy’s port. CUT
THAT! be quiet, or stop; CUT OUT OF, done out of; CUT OF ONE’S JIB, the
expression or cast of his countenance [_see_ JIB]; TO CUT ONE’S COMB, to
take down a conceited person, from the practice of cutting the combs of
capons [_see_ COMB CUT]; CUT AND COME AGAIN, plenty, if one cut does not
suffice, plenty remains to come at again; CUT UP, to mortify, to
criticise severely, or expose; CUT UP SHINES, to play tricks; CUT ONE’S
STICK, to be off quickly, _i.e._, to be in readiness for a journey,
further elaborated into AMPUTATE YOUR MAHOGANY [_see_ STICK]; CUT IT
FAT, to exaggerate or show off in an extensive manner; to CUT UP FAT, or
CUT UP WELL, to die, leaving a large property; CUT UNDER, to undersell;
CUT YOUR LUCKY, to run off; CUT ONE’S CART, to expose unfair tricks; CUT
AN ACQUAINTANCE, to cease friendly intercourse with him; “CUT UP ROUGH,”
to become obstreperous and dangerous; to have “CUT ONE’S EYE-TEETH,”
_i.e._, to be wide awake, knowing; to DRAW CUTS, to cast lots with
papers of unequal lengths.

~Cut~, to take cards from a pack, with a view to decide by comparison
which persons shall be partners, or which players shall deal. Not less
than four cards must be picked up by the cutter, and the bottom one is
the CUT. When cutting for a “turn-up,” the residuum is called the CUT.

~Cut~, in theatrical language, means to strike out portions of a
dramatic piece, so as to render it shorter for representation. A late
treasurer of one of the so-called Patent Theatres when asked his opinion
of a new play, always gave utterance to the brief but safe piece of
criticism, “Wants cutting.”

~Cut~, tipsy.—_Old._

~Cut~, to compete in business; “a CUTTING trade,” one conducted on
competitive principles, where the profits are very closely shaved.

~Cut-throat~, a butcher, a cattle-slaughterer; a ruffian.

~Cute~, sharp, cunning. Abbreviation of ACUTE.

~Cutter~, a ruffian, a cut-purse. Of Robin Hood it was said—

    “So being outlaw’d (as ’tis told),
      He with a crew went forth
    Of lusty CUTTERS, bold and strong,
      And robbed in the north.”

CUTTER, a swashbuckler—_balaffreux taillebras, fendeur de
naseaux._—_Cotgrave._

    “He’s out of cash, and thou know’st by CUTTER’S LAW,
    We are bound to relieve one another.”

        _Match at Midn._, O. Pl., vii. 553.

This ancient cant word now survives in the phrase, “to swear like a
CUTTER.”

~Cutting-shop~, a place where cheap rough goods are sold.

~Cutty-pipe~, a short clay pipe. _Scotch_, CUTTY, short.

~Cutty-sark~, a short chemise.—_Scotch._ A scantily-draped lady is so
called by Burns.

        “‘Weel done, CUTTY-SARK!’
    And in an instant all was dark.”

~Dab~, or DABSTER, an expert person. Most probably derived from the
Latin _adeptus_.

~Dab~, street term for small flat fish of any kind.—_Old._

~Dacha-saltee~, tenpence. Probably from the _Lingua Franca_. _Modern
Greek_, δέκα; _Italian_, DIECI SOLDI, tenpence; _Gipsy_, DIK, ten. So
also DACHA-ONE (oney), _i.e._, _dieci uno_, elevenpence.—_See_ SALTEE.

~Daddle~, the hand; “tip us your DADDLE,” _i.e._, shake hands.

~Daddy~, a stage manager.—_Theatrical._ Also the person who gives away
the bride at a wedding.

~Daddy;~ at mock raffles, lotteries, &c., the DADDY is an accomplice,
most commonly the getter-up of the swindle, and in all cases the person
that has been previously selected to win the prize.

~Daddy~, the old man in charge—generally an aged pauper—at casual
wards. Most people will remember “kind old DADDY.”

~Daffy~, gin. A term with monthly nurses, who are always extolling the
virtues of Daffy’s Elixir, and who occasionally comfort themselves with
a stronger medicine under Daffy’s name. Of late years the term has been
altered to “soothing syrup.”

~Dags~, feat or performance; “I’ll do your DAGS,” _i.e._, I will do
something that you cannot do. Corruption of DARINGS.

~Dairies~, a woman’s breasts, which are also called CHARLIES.

~Daisy-cutter~, a horse that trots or gallops without lifting its feet
much from the ground.

~Daisy-kicker~, the name ostlers at large inns used to give each other,
now nearly obsolete. DAISY-KICKER, or GROGHAM, was likewise the cant
term for a horse. The DAISY-KICKERS were sad rogues in the old posting
days; frequently the landlords rented the stables to them, as the only
plan to make them return a profit.

~Damage~, in the sense of recompense; “what’s the DAMAGE?” _i.e._, what
is to pay? or actually, what is the DAMAGE to my pocket?

~Damper~, a shop till; to DRAW A DAMPER, _i.e._, rob a till. A till is
more modernly called a “lob,” and stealing from tills is known as
“lob-sneaking.”

~Dancer, or dancing-master~, a thief who prowls about the roofs of
houses, and effects an entrance by attic windows, &c. Called also a
“garreter.”

~Dance upon nothing~, to be hanged.

~Dander~, passion or temper; “to get one’s DANDER up,” to rouse his
passion.—_Old_, but now much used in America.

~Dando~, a great eater, who cheats at hotels, eating shops,
oyster-cellars, &c., from a person of that name who lived many years
ago, and who was an enormous oyster-eater. According to the stories
related of him, Dando would visit an oyster-room, devour an almost
fabulous quantity of bivalves, with porter and bread and butter to
match, and then calmly state that he had no money.

~Dandy~, a fop, or fashionable nondescript. This word, in the sense of a
fop, is of modern origin. Egan says it was first used in 1820, and Bee
in 1816. Johnson does not mention it, although it is to be found in all
late dictionaries. DANDIES wore stays, studied a feminine style, and
tried to undo their manhood by all manner of affectations which were not
actually immoral. Lord Petersham headed them. At the present day dandies
of this stamp have almost entirely disappeared, but the new school of
muscular Christians is not altogether faultless. The feminine of DANDY
was DANDIZETTE, but the term only lived for a short season.

~Dandy~, a small glass of whisky.—_Irish._ “Dimidium cyathi vero apud
Metropolitanos Hibernicos dicitur DANDY.”—_Father Tom and the Pope_, in
_Blackwood’s Magazine_ for May 1838.

~Dandy~, a boatman.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Dandypratt~, a funny little fellow, a mannikin; originally a
half-farthing of the time of Henry VII.

~Danna~, human ordure; DANNA DRAG, a nightman’s or dustman’s cart;
hence DUNNA-KEN, which _see_.

~Darbies~, handcuffs.—_Old Cant._—_See_ JOHNNY DARBIES. Sir Walter
Scott mentions these, in the sense of fetters, in his _Peveril of the
Peak_—

    “‘Hark ye! Jem Clink will fetch you the DARBIES.’ ‘Derby!’
    interrupted Julian, ‘has the Earl or Countess’”----

Had Sir Walter known of any connexion between them and this family he
would undoubtedly have mentioned it. The mistake of Julian is corrected
in the next paragraph. It is said that handcuffs were, when used to keep
two prisoners together, called DARBIES and JOANS—a term which would
soon be shortened as a natural consequence.

~Darble~, the devil. _French_, DIABLE.

~Dark~, “keep it DARK,” _i.e._, secret. A DARK horse is, in racing
phraseology, a horse of whom nothing positive is known, but who is
generally supposed to have claims to the consideration of all
interested, whether bookmakers or backers.

~Darky~, twilight; also a negro. DARKMANS, the night.

~Darn~, vulgar corruption of DAMN.—_American._

~Dash~, to jot down suddenly. “Things I have DASHED off at a moment’s
notice.”

~Dash~, fire, vigour, manliness. Literary and artistic work is often
said to be full of DASH.

~Dash~, an ejaculation, as “DASH my wig!” “DASH my buttons!” A relic of
the attempts made, when cursing was fashionable, to be in the mode
without using “bad words.”

~Dashing~, showy, fast.

~Daub~, in low language, an artist. Also a badly painted picture.

~David’s sow~, “as drunk as DAVID’S sow,” _i.e._, beastly drunk. _See_
origin of the phrase in Grose’s _Dictionary_.

~Davy~, “on my DAVY,” on my affidavit, of which it is a vulgar
corruption. Latterly DAVY has become synonymous in street language with
the name of the Deity; “so help me DAVY,” generally rendered, “swelp my
DAVY.” Slang version of the conclusion of the oath usually exacted of
witnesses.

~Davy’s locker~, or DAVY JONES’S LOCKER, the sea, the common receptacle
for all things thrown overboard;—a nautical phrase for death, is “gone
to DAVY JONES’S LOCKER,” which there means the other world.—_See_
DUFFY.

~Dawdle~, to loiter, or fritter away time.

~Dawk~, the post.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Daylights~, eyes; “to darken his DAYLIGHTS,” to give a person black
eyes. Also the spaces left in glasses between the liquor and the
brim,—not allowed when bumpers are drunk. The toast-master in such
cases cries “no DAYLIGHTS or heeltaps!”

~Daze~, to confound or bewilder; an ancient form of dazzle used by
Spenser, Drayton, &c. This is more obsolete English than slang, though
its use nowadays might fairly bring it within the latter category.

~Dead-against~, decidedly opposed to.

~Dead-alive~, stupid, dull.

~Dead-amiss~, said of a horse that from illness is utterly unable to run
for a prize.

~Dead-beat~, utterly exhausted, utterly “done up.”

~Dead-heat~, when two horses run home so exactly equal that the judge
cannot place one before the other; consequently, a DEAD-HEAT is a heat
which counts for nothing, so far as the even runners are concerned, as
it has to be run over again. When a race between dead-heaters has been
unusually severe, or when the stake is sufficiently good to bear
division, it is usual to let one of the animals walk over the course so
as to make a deciding heat, and to divide the money. In such case all
bets are divided. Sometimes, however, when no arrangement can be made,
an owner will withdraw his horse, in which case the animal that walks
over wins the whole of the stake, and his backers the whole of their
money. Where the course is short and the money of small amount, the
DEAD-HEAT is run off, the second essay being called the decider, though
on certain occasions even the decider has resulted in a
DEAD-HEAT.—_See_ NECK AND NECK.

~Dead-horse~, “to draw the DEAD-HORSE;” DEAD-HORSE work—working for
wages already paid; also any thankless or unassisted service.

~Dead-letter~, an action of no value or weight; an article, owing to
some mistake in its production, rendered utterly valueless,—often
applied to any instrument in writing, which by some apparently trivial
omission, becomes useless. At the general and large district
post-offices, there is a department for letters which have been
erroneously addressed, or for which, from many and various causes, there
are no receivers. These are called DEAD-LETTERS, and the office in
connexion with them is known as the DEAD-LETTER office.

~Dead-lock~, a permanent standstill, an inextricable entanglement.

~Dead-lurk~, entering a dwelling-house during divine service.

~Dead-man~, a baker. Properly speaking, it is an extra loaf smuggled
into the basket by the man who carries it out, to the loss of the
master. Sometimes the DEAD-MAN is charged to a customer, though never
delivered. Among London thieves and low people generally a “dead’un” is
a half-quartern loaf.

~Dead-men~, the term for wine bottles after they are emptied of their
contents.—_Old._—_See_ MARINES.

~Dead-men’s shoes~, property which cannot be claimed until after decease
of present holder. “To wait for a pair of DEAD-MEN’S SHOES,” is
considered a wearisome affair. It is used by Fletcher:—

    “And ’tis a general shrift, that most men use,
    But yet ’tis tedious waiting DEAD MEN’S SHOES.”

        _Fletcher’s Poems_, p. 256.

~Dead-set~, a pointed and persistent attack on a person.

~Dead’un~, a horse which will not run or will not try in a race, and
against which money may be betted with safety.—_See_ SAFE UN.

~Deaner~, a shilling. From DENIER.

~Death~, “to dress to DEATH,” _i.e._, to the very extreme of fashion,
perhaps so as to be killing.

~Death-hunter~, a running patterer, who vends last dying speeches and
confessions. More modernly the term is supposed to mean an undertaker,
or any one engaged in or concerned with burials.

~Deck~, a pack of cards. Used by Shakspeare, 3 _K. Hen. VI._, v. 1.
Probably because of DECKING or arranging the table for a game at cards.
General in the United States.

~Dee~, a pocket-book; term used by tramps.—_Gipsy._ DEE (properly D), a
detective policeman. “The DEES are about, so look out.”

~Delicate~, a false subscription-book carried by a LURKER.

~Demirep~ (or DEMIRIP), a courtezan. Contraction of DEMI-REPUTATION,
which is, in turn, a contraction for _demi-monde_ reputation.

~Derby-dog~, a masterless animal, who is sure to appear as soon as the
Epsom course is cleared for the great race of the season. No year passes
without a dog running between the two dense lines of spectators and
searching in vain for an outlet, and he is almost as eagerly looked for
as are the “preliminary canters.” It is said that when no DERBY-DOG
appears on the course between Tattenham Corner and the judge’s box, just
before the start, a dead-heat will take place between all the placed
horses.

~Derrick~, an apparatus for raising sunken ships, &c. The term is
curiously derived from a hangman of that name frequently mentioned in
Old Plays, as in the _Bellman of London_, 1616.

    “He rides circuit with the devil, and DERRICK must be his host, and
    Tyborne the inn at which he will light.”

The term is now almost general for all cranes used in loading ships, or
doing similar work of a heavy nature.

~Despatchers~, false dice with two sets of numbers, and, of course, no
low pips. So called because they bring the matter to a speedy issue.
Great skill in palming is necessary for their successful use.

~Deuce~, the devil.—_Old._ Stated by _Junius_ and others to be from
DEUS or ZEUS.

~Deuce~, twopence; DEUCE at cards or dice, one with two pips or spots.

~Devil~, among barristers, to get up the facts of a case for a leader;
to arrange everything in the most comprehensive form, so that the Q.C.
or Serjeant can absorb the question without much trouble. DEVILLING is
juniors’ work, but much depends on it, and on the ability with which it
is done.

~Devil~, a printer’s youngest apprentice, an errand-boy in a
printing-office.

~Devil dodger~, a clergyman; also a person who goes sometimes to church
and sometimes to meeting.

~Devil-may-care~, reckless, rash.

~Devil’s bed-posts~, the four of clubs. Otherwise Old Gentleman’s
BED-POSTS.

~Devil’s books~, a pack of playing-cards; a phrase of Presbyterian
origin.—_See_ FOUR KINGS.

~Devil’s delight~, a noise or row of any description. Generally used
thus:—“They kicked up the DEVIL’S DELIGHT.”

~Devil’s dung~, the fetid drug assafœtida.

~Devil’s dust~, a term used in the manufacturing districts of Yorkshire
to denote shreds of old cloth torn up to re-manufacture; also called
SHODDY. Mr. Ferrand, in his speech in the House, March 4, 1842, produced
a piece of cloth made chiefly from DEVIL’S DUST, and tore it into shreds
to prove its worthlessness.—_See Hansard’s Parliamentary Debates_,
third series, vol. lxi. p. 140.

~Devil-scolder~, a clergyman.

~Devil’s livery~, black and yellow. From the mourning and quarantine
uses of the colours.

~Devil’s teeth~, or DEVIL’S BONES, dice.

~Devotional habits~, horses weak in the knees, and apt to stumble and
fall, are said to have these.—_Stable._

~Dew-beaters~, feet; “hold out your DEW-BEATERS till I take off the
darbies.”—_Peveril of the Peak._ Forby says the word is used in Norfolk
for heavy shoes to resist wet.

~Dew-drink~, a morning draught, such as is served out to labourers in
harvest time before commencing work.

~Dewskitch~, a good thrashing, perhaps from catching one’s due.

~Dibbs~, money; so called from the huckle bones of sheep, which have
been used from the earliest times for gambling purposes when money was
not obtainable—in one particular game being thrown up five at a time
and caught on the back of the hand like halfpence.

~Dick~, a riding whip; gold-headed DICK, one so ornamented.

~Dick~, abbreviation of “Dictionary,” but often euphemistically rendered
“Richard,”—fine language, long words. A man who uses fine words without
much judgment is said to have “swallowed the DICK.”

~Dickens~, synonymous with devil; “what the DICKENS are you after?” what
the devil are you doing? Used by Shakspeare in the _Merry Wives of
Windsor_. In many old stories his Satanic Majesty is called the DICKENS,
and by no other name, while in some others the word is spelt “diconce.”

~Dickey~, bad, sorry, or foolish; food or lodging is pronounced DICKEY
when of a poor description; “very DICKEY”, very inferior; “it’s all
DICKEY with him,” _i.e._, all over with him.

~Dickey~, formerly the cant for a worn-out shirt, but nowadays used for
a front or half-shirt. DICKEY was originally “tommy” (from the Greek,
τομή, a section), a name which was formerly used in Trinity College,
Dublin. The students are said to have invented the term, and love of
change and circumlocution soon changed it to DICKEY, in which dress it
is supposed to have been imported into England.

~Dickey~, a donkey.—_Norfolk._

~Dickey Sam~, a native of Liverpool.

~Dicking;~ “look! the bulky is DICKING,” _i.e._, the constable has his
eye on you.—_North Country Cant._

~Diddle~, old cant word for geneva, or gin.

~Diddle~, to cheat, or defraud.—_Old._ In _German_, DUDELN is to play
on the bagpipe; and the ideas of piping and cheating seem to have been
much connected. “Do you think I am easier played on than a pipe?” occurs
in _Hamlet_.

~Diddler~, or JEREMY DIDDLER, an artful swindler. A diddler is generally
one who borrows money without any intention of ever repaying it; the
sort of man who, having asked for half-a-crown and received only a
shilling, would consider that eighteenpence was owing to him.—From
_Raising the Wind_.

~Diddling~, cheating or swindling. Borrowing money without any intention
of repaying it. Edgar Allan Poe wrote a very amusing article once on
DIDDLING, which he seemed to regard as a rather high art.

~Didoes~, pranks or capers; “to cut up DIDOES,” to make pranks.

~Dig~, a hard blow. Generally in pugilistic circles applied to a
straight “left-hander,” delivered under the guard on the “mark.”

~Diggers~, spurs; also the spades on cards.

~Diggings~, lodgings, apartments, residence; an expression probably
imported from California, or Australia, with reference to the gold
diggings. It is very common nowadays for a man moving in very decent
society to call his abode or his office, or anyplace to which he
frequently resorts, his “DIGGINGS.”

~Dilly~, originally a coach, from _diligence_. Now a night-cart.

~Dilly-dally~, to trifle.

~Dimber~, neat or pretty.—_Worcestershire_, but old cant.

~Dimber-damber~, very pretty; a clever rogue who excels his fellows;
chief of a gang. _Old Cant_ in the latter sense.

~Dimmock~, money; “how are you off for DIMMOCK?” diminutive of DIME, a
small foreign silver coin, in the United States 10 cents.

~Dinarly~, money; “NANTEE DINARLY,” I have no money, corrupted from the
_Lingua Franca_, “NIENTE DINARO,” not a penny. _Turkish_, DINARI;
_Spanish_, DINERO; _Latin_, DENARIUS.

~Dine out~, to go without dinner. “I DINED OUT to-day,” would express
the same among the very lower classes that “dining with Duke Humphrey”
expresses among the middle and upper.

~Ding~, to strike; to throw away, or get rid of anything; to pass to a
confederate by throwing. _Old_, used in old plays.

    “The butcher’s axe (like great Alcides’ bat)
      _Dings_ deadly downe ten thousand thousand flat.”

        _Taylor’s Works_, 1630.

~Dingy~, a small boat. Generally the smallest boat carried by a ship.
The _g_ in this is pronounced hard.

~Dipped~, mortgaged.

~Dirt~, TO EAT, an expression derived from the East, nearly the same as
“to eat humble (_Umble_) pie,” to put up with a mortification or insult.

~Dirty Half-hundred~, a nickname given to the 50th Regiment on account
of their tattered and soiled appearance during the Peninsular War. A
term to be proud of, as it implies much work and little reward.

~Disguised~, intoxicated. A very old term is that of “DISGUISED in
drink.”

    “Some say drinking does DISGUISE men.”—_Old Song._

    “The saylers and the shipmen all,
      Through foul excesse of wine,
    Were so DISGUISED that at the sea
      They shew’d themselves like swine.”

        _Thos. Deloney’s Strange Histories_, p. 14.

~Dish~, to stop, to do away with, to suppress; DISHED, done for,
floored, beaten, or silenced. To “do brown” and to “DISH,” both verbs
with very similar meanings, have an evident connexion so far as origin
is concerned, and most likely were both first used in the kitchen as
synonymous with “done for.” The late Lord Derby made the word “DISH”
famous by his latest public act, that of “DISHING the Whigs.”

~Dithers~, nervous or cold shiverings; “it gave me the DITHERS.”

~Dittoes~, A SUIT OF, coat, waistcoat, and trousers of the same
material.—_Tailor’s term._

~Ditty-bag~, the bag or huswife in which sailors keep needles, thread,
buttons, &c., for mending their clothes.

~Diver~, a pickpocket. Also applied to fingers, no doubt from a similar
reason. To DIVE is to pick pockets.

~Do~, this useful and industrious verb has for many years done service
as a slang term. To DO a person is to cheat him. Sometimes another tense
is employed, such as “I DONE him,” meaning, I cheated or “paid him out;”
this is only used in the lowest grades of society. DONE BROWN, cheated
thoroughly, befooled; DONE OVER, upset, cheated, knocked down, ruined.
Among thieves DONE OVER means that a man’s pockets have been all quietly
searched; the term also means among low people seduced; DONE UP, used
up, finished, or quieted. DONE also means convicted, or sentenced; so
does DONE-FOR. To DO a person in pugilism is to beat him. Humphreys, who
fought Mendoza, a Jew, wrote this laconic note to his supporter—“I have
DONE the Jew, and am in good health.—Rich. Humphreys.” Tourists use the
expression, “I have DONE France and Italy,” meaning I have been through
those countries.

~Dobie~, an Indian washerman; and though women wash clothes in this
country, Anglo-Indians speak of a washerwoman as a DOBIE.

~Doctor~, to adulterate or drug liquor; to poison, to hocus; also to
falsify accounts. A publican who sells bad liquors is said to keep the
DOCTOR in his cellars. On board ship the cook is always termed “the
DOCTOR.”—_See_ COOK.

~Doddy~, a term applied in Norfolk to any person of low stature.
Sometimes HODMANDOD and “HODDY-DODDY, all head and no body.” DODMAN in
the same dialect denotes a garden snail.

~Dodge~, a cunning trick. “DODGE, that homely but expressive
phrase.”—Sir Hugh Cairns on the Reform Bill, 2nd March, 1859.
_Anglo-Saxon_, DEOGIAN, to colour, to conceal. The TIDY DODGE, as it is
called by street-folk, consists in dressing up a family clean and tidy,
and parading in the streets to excite compassion and obtain alms.

~Dodger~, a dram. In Kent, a DODGER signifies a nightcap; which name is
often given to the last dram at night.

~Dodger~, a tricky person, or one who, to use the popular phrase, “knows
too much.” Also one who knows all phases of London life, and profits by
such knowledge.

~Dogberry~, a foolish constable.—_Shakspeare._

~Dog cheap~, or DOG-FOOLISH, very or singularly cheap, or foolish.
Latham, in his _English Language_, says:—“This has nothing to do with
dogs. The first syllable is god = _good_, transposed, and the second,
the ch‑‑p, is chapman, merchant: compare EASTCHEAP.”—_Old term._

~Doggery~, nonsense, transparent attempts to cheat.

~Dog gone~, a form of mild swearing used by boys.

~Dog in a blanket~, a kind of pudding, made of preserved fruit spread on
thin dough, and then rolled up and boiled. This pudding is also called
“rolly-polly” and “stocking.”

~Dog in the manger~, a scurvy, ill-conditioned, selfish fellow. From the
fable of that title.

~Dog Latin~, barbarous Latin, such as was formerly used by lawyers in
their pleadings. Now applied to medical Latin.

~Dogs~, TO GO TO THE, to be commercially or socially ruined. Originally
a stable term applied to old or worthless horses, sold to feed hounds.

~Dog’s body~, a kind of pease pudding.—_Sea._

~Dog’s ears~, the curled corners of the leaves of books, which have been
carelessly treated. The use of this term is so common that it is hardly
to be considered slang.

~Dog’s nose~, gin and beer, so called from the mixture being _cold_,
like a dog’s nose.

~Dog stealer~, a DOG DEALER. There is sometimes less difference between
the two trades than between “d” and “st.”

~Doing time~, working out a sentence in prison. “He’s done time,” is a
slang phrase used in reference to a man who is known to have been in
gaol.

~Doldrums~, difficulties, low spirits, dumps.—_Sea._

~Dollop~, a lump or portion.—_Norfolk._ _Anglo-Saxon_, DALE, _dole_.

~Dollop~, to _dole up_, to give up a share.—_Ibid._

~Dolly~, a very mild gambling contrivance, generally used in sweetmeat
and other child’s-ware shops, until stopped by the authorities a few
years back, and consisting of a round board and the figure of an old man
or “DOLLY,” down which was a spiral hole. A marble dropped “down the
DOLLY,” would stop in one of the small holes or pits (numbered) on the
board. The bet was decided according as the marble stopped on a high or
low figure. _See_ DOLLY-SHOP.

~Dollymop~, a tawdrily-dressed maid-servant, a semi-professional
street-walker.

~Dolly shop~, an illegal pawnshop,—where goods, or stolen property, not
good enough for the pawnbroker, are received, and charged at so much per
day. If not redeemed the third day the goods are forfeited. Originally
these shops were rag shops as well, and were represented by the _black
doll_, the usual sign of a rag shop. Twenty years ago, a DOLLY SHOP was,
among boys, a small sweetstuff and fruit shop where a hollow wooden
figure, of the kind described above, was kept. A wager was made, and the
customer got double quantity for his money, or nothing. A paternal
legislature, and a police system worthy of the task, have long since
wiped this blot from a nation’s face. The amount at stake was generally
a halfpenny, sometimes less.

~Dominie~, a parson, or master at a grammar school.

~Domino~, a common ejaculation of soldiers and sailors when they receive
the last lash of a flogging. The allusion may be understood from the
game of dominoes. A DOMINO means either a blow, or the last of a series
of things, whether pleasant or otherwise, so the ejaculation savours
somewhat of wit.

~Dominoes~, the teeth.

~Don~, a clever fellow, the opposite of a muff; a person of distinction
in his line or walk. At the English Universities, the Masters and
Fellows are the DONS. DON is also used as an adjective, “a DON hand at a
knife and fork,” _i.e._, a first-rate feeder at a dinner-table.

~Dona and feeles~, a woman and children. _Italian_ or _Lingua Franca_,
DONNE E FIGLIE. The word DONA is usually pronounced DONER.

~Done!~ the expression used when a bet is accepted. To be DONE, is to be
considerably worsted.—_See_ also DO.

~Done up~, an equivalent expression to “dead beat.”

~Donkey~, “tuppence more and up goes the DONKEY,” a vulgar street phrase
for extracting as much money as possible before performing any task. The
phrase had its origin with a travelling showman, the finale of whose
performance was the hoisting of a DONKEY on a pole or ladder; but this
consummation was never arrived at unless the required amount was first
paid up, and “tuppence more” was generally the sum demanded.

~Donkey~, in printers’ slang, means a compositor. In the days before
steam machinery was invented, the men who worked at press—the
pressmen—were so dirty and drunken a body that they earned the name of
pigs. In revenge, and for no reason that can be discovered, they
christened the compositors DONKEYS.

~Don Pedro~, a game at cards. It is a compound of All Fours, and the
Irish game variously termed All Fives, Five and Ten, Fifteen,
Forty-five, &c. It was probably invented by the mixed English and Irish
rabble who fought in Portugal in 1832-3.

~Dookin~, fortune-telling. _Gipsy_, DUKKERIN.

~Dose~, three months’ imprisonment with hard labour.

~Doss~, a bed. Probably from DOZE, though quite as likely from DORSE,
the back. Least likely of all, as any one who knows aught about the
surrounding circumstances of those who use the term will admit, is it
from the Norman, DOSSEL, a hanging or bed canopy, from which some have
professed to derive it.

~Doss~, to sleep, formerly spelt DORSE. _Gael._, DOSAL, slumber. In the
old pugilistic days a man knocked down, or out of time, was said to be
“sent to DORSE,” but whether because he was senseless, or because he lay
on his back, is not known, though most likely the latter.

~Dossing-ken~, a lodging-house.

~Dot and go one~, a lame or limping man.

~Do the high~, to walk up and down High Street on Sunday evenings,
especially just after Church.—_Oxford University._

~Double~, “to tip (or give) the DOUBLE,” to run away from any person; to
double back, turn short round upon one’s pursuers, and so escape, as a
hare does.—_Sporting._

~Double cross~, a CROSS in which a man who has engaged to lose breaks
his engagement, and “goes straight” at the last moment. This proceeding
is called “doubling” or “putting the double on,” and is often productive
of much excitement in athletic circles.—_See_ CROSS.

~Double lines~, ship casualties. So called at Lloyd’s from the manner of
entering in books kept for the purpose.

~Double-shuffle~, a low, shuffling, noisy dance, common amongst
costermongers. Sometimes called “cellar flap,” from its being danced by
the impecunious on the cellar-flaps of public-houses, outside which they
must perforce remain.

~Doublet~, a spurious diamond, made up of two smaller stones for pawning
or duffing purposes. These articles are cleverly manufactured and
excellently set, and a practised eye can alone detect the
imposition.—_See_ MOSKENEER.

~Double up~, to pair off, or “chum” with another man; to beat severely,
so as to leave the sufferer “all of a heap.”

~Doughy~, a sufficiently obvious nickname for a baker.

~Douse~, to put out; “DOUSE that glim,” put out that candle. In Norfolk
this expression is DOUT, which is clearly for DO OUT. Sometimes DOUSE
means to rinse; and sometimes to throw water, clean or dirty, over any
one, is to “DOUSE it.”

~Dovercourt~, a noisy assemblage; “all talkers and no hearers, like
DOVERCOURT.” At Dovercourt, in Essex, a court is annually held; and as
the members principally consist of rude fishermen, the irregularity
noticed in the proverbial saying frequently prevails. Bramston in his
_Art of Politics_ says:—

    “Those who would captivate the well-bred throng,
    Should not too often speak, nor speak too long;
    Church, nor church matters, ever turn to sport,
    Nor make St. Stephen’s Chapel DOVER COURT.”

This would seem to be more properly applied to a Court of Dover people,
a DOVER COURT, not a DOVERCOURT COURT.

~Dove-tart~, a pigeon pie. A snake tart is an eel pie.

~Dowd~, a woman’s nightcap.—_Devonshire_: also an American term;
possibly from DOWDY, a slatternly woman.

~Dowlas~, a linendraper. DOWLAS is a sort of towelling.

~Down~, to be aware of, or awake to, any move—in this meaning,
exchangeable with UP; “DOWN upon one’s luck,” unfortunate; “DOWN in the
mouth,” disconsolate; “to be DOWN on one,” to treat him harshly or
suspiciously, to pounce upon him, or detect his tricks.

~Downer~, a sixpence; apparently the Gipsy word, TAWNO, “little one,” in
course of metamorphosis into the more usual “tanner.”

~Downs~, Tothill Fields’ Prison.

~Down the road~, stylish, showy, after the fashion.

~Down to the ground~, an American rendering of the word entirely; as,
“that suits me DOWN TO THE GROUND.”

~Downy~, knowing or cunning; “a DOWNY COVE,” a knowing or experienced
sharper. Literally, a DOWNY person is one who is “DOWN to every move on
the board.” In Norfolk, however, it means low-spirited, _i.e._, DOWN in
the mouth.

~Dowry~, a lot, a great deal; “DOWRY of parny,” lot of rain or
water.—_See_ PARNY. Probably from the Gipsy.

~Dowsers~, men who profess to tell fortunes, and who, by the use of the
divining rod, pretend to be able to discover treasure-trove.—_Cornish._

~Doxy~, the female companion of a tramp or beggar. In the West of
England, the women frequently call their little girls DOXIES, in a
familiar or endearing sense. _Orthodoxy_ has been described as being a
man’s own DOXY, and _heterodoxy_ another man’s DOXY.—_Ancient Cant._

~Drab~, a vulgar or low woman.—_Shakspeare._

~Drab~, poison.—_Romany._

~Draft on Aldgate Pump~, an old mercantile phrase for a fictitious
banknote or fraudulent bill.

~Drag~, a cart of any kind, term generally used to denote any
particularly well-appointed turnout, drawn by a pair or four horses,
especially at race meetings.

~Drag~, feminine attire worn by men. A recent notorious impersonation
case led to the publication of the word in that sense.

~Drag~, a street, or road; BACK-DRAG, back street.

~Drag~, or THREE MOON, three months in prison.

~Drag~, THE, a favourite pursuit with fast-hunting sets; as, THE DRAG
can be trailed over very stiff country.

~Dragging~, robbing carts, &c., by means of a light trap which follows
behind laden vehicles. Cabs are sometimes eased of trunks in this way,
though it is hard to say whether with or without the complicity of the
cabmen.

~Dragging time~, the evening of a country fair day, when the young
fellows begin pulling the wenches about.

~Draggletail~, a dirty, dissipated woman; a prostitute of the lowest
class.

~Drain~, a drink; “to do a DRAIN,” to take a friendly drink—“do a wet;”
sometimes called a “common sewer.”

~Draw~, used in several senses:—1, of a theatre, new piece or
exhibition, when it attracts the public and succeeds; 2, to induce—as,
“DRAW him on;” 3, of pocket-picking—as, “DRAW his wipe,” “DRAW his
ticker.” In sporting parlance it is used with an ellipsis of “trigger,”
“I DREW on it as it rose.” In America to “DRAW on a man” is to produce
knife or pistol, and to use it as well. Where lethal weapons are used in
the States, no man raises his weapon till he means to use it, and a
celebrated American writer has recently given a dissertation on the
relative advantages of cocking and firing a pistol by an almost
simultaneous action as it is raised, and of cocking as the instrument is
raised, and of then dropping the muzzle slightly as the trigger is
pulled. The former way is more speedy, the latter more effective. “Come,
DRAW it mild!” _i.e._, don’t exaggerate; opposite of “come it strong,”
from the phraseology of the bar (of a “public”), where customers desire
the beer to be “drawn mild.”

~Draw-boy~, a cunning device used by puffing tradesmen. A really good
article is advertised or ticketed and exposed for sale in the shop
window at a very low price, with a view of drawing in customers to
purchase other and inferior articles at high prices. These gentry have
fortunately found to their cost, on one or two occasions, by means of
magisterial decisions, that DRAW-BOYS have drawn for their owners
something other than profit.

~Drawers~, formerly the ancient cant name for very long stockings.

~Drawing teeth~, wrenching off knockers.—_Medical Student slang._

~Drawlatch~, a loiterer.

~Draw off~, to throw back the body to give impetus to a blow; “he DREW
OFF, and delivered on the left drum.”—_Pugilistic._ A sailor would say,
“he hauled off and slipped in.”

~Draw the long bow~, to tell extravagant stories, to exaggerate
overmuch; same as “throw the hatchet.” From the extremely wonderful
stories which used to be told of the Norman archers, and more
subsequently of Indians’ skill with the tomahawk.

~Dress a hat~, TO, to rob in a manner very difficult of detection. The
business is managed by two or more servants or shopmen of different
employers, exchanging their master’s goods; as, for instance, a
shoemaker’s shopman receives shirts or other articles from a hosier’s,
in return for a pair of boots. Another very ingenious method may be
witnessed about eleven o’clock in the forenoon in any of the suburban
districts of London. A butcher’s boy, with a bit of steak filched from
his master’s shop, or from a customer, falls in with a neighbouring
baker’s man, who has a loaf obtained in a similar manner. Their mutual
friend, the potboy, in full expectation of their visit, has the tap-room
fire bright and clear, and not only cooks the steak, but again, by means
of collusion, this time with the barman or barmaid, “stands a shant of
gatter” as his share. So a capital luncheon is improvised for the three,
without the necessity of paying for it; and this practical communistic
operation is styled DRESSING A HAT. Most likely from the fact that a hat
receives the attention of three or four people before it is properly fit
for wear.

~Dripping~, a cook.

~Drive~, a term used by tradesmen in speaking of business; “he’s DRIVING
a roaring trade,” _i.e._, a very good one; hence, to succeed in a
bargain, “I DROVE a good bargain,” _i.e._, got the best end of it. To
“LET DRIVE at one,” to strike out. A man snoring hard is said to be
“DRIVING his pigs to market.”

~Drive at~, to aim at; “what is he DRIVING AT?” “what does he intend to
imply?” a phrase often used when a circuitous line of argument is
adopted by a barrister, or a strange set of questions asked, the purport
of which is not very evident.

~Driz~, lace. In a low lodging-house this singular autograph inscription
appeared over the mantelpiece. “Scotch Mary, with DRIZ [lace], bound to
Dover and back, please God.” It is a common thing for ignorant or
superstitious people to make some mark or sign before going on a
journey, and then to wonder whether it will be there when they return.

~Driz-fencer~, a person who sells lace.

~Drop~, “to DROP an acquaintance,” to relinquish a connexion, is very
polite slang. DROPPING is distinguished from cutting by being done
gradually and almost imperceptibly, whereas cutting has outward and
visible signs which may be unpleasantly resented. To “DROP money” at any
form of speculation or gambling, is to lose it.

~Drop~, to quit, go off, or turn aside; “DROP the main Toby,” go off the
main road.

~Drop~, “to DROP a man,” to knock him down; “to DROP into a person,” to
give him a thrashing. _See_ SLIP and WALK. “To DROP on a man,” to accuse
or rebuke him suddenly.

~Drop it~, synonymous with “cut it” or “cheese it.” Probably from the
signal given in the good old hanging days by the culprit, who used
generally to drop a handkerchief when he was ready for the cart to be
moved from under him.

~Drum~, a house, a lodging, a street; HAZARD-DRUM, a gambling-house;
FLASH-DRUM, a house of ill-fame.

~Drum~, the ear.—_Pugilistic._ An example of slang synecdoche.

~Drum~, as applied to the road, is doubtless from the Wallachian gipsy
word “DRUMRI,” derived from the _Greek_, δρόμος.

~Drum~, old slang for a ball or rout; afterwards called a hop.

~Drummer~, a robber who first makes his victims insensible by drugs or
violence, and then plunders them.

~Drumsticks~, legs; DRUMSTICK CASES, trousers. The leg of a fowl is
generally called a DRUMSTICK.

~Dryasdust~, an antiquary. From Scott.

~Dry lodging~, sleeping and sitting accommodation only, without board.
This is lodging-house keepers’ slang, and is generally used in reference
to rooms let to lodgers who take their meals at their clubs, or in the
City, according to their social positions.

~Dry nurse~, when an inferior officer on board ship carries on the duty,
on account of the captain’s ignorance of seamanship, the junior officer
is said to DRY-NURSE his captain. Majors and adjutants in the army also
not unfrequently DRY-NURSE the colonels of their regiments in a similar
manner. The sergeant who coaches very young officers, is called a “wet
nurse.” The abolition of purchase has, however, considerably modified
all this.

~D.T.~, a popular abbreviation of delirium tremens; sometimes written
and pronounced _del. trem._ D.T. also often represents the _Daily
Telegraph_.

~Dub~, to pay or give; “DUB UP,” pay up.

~Dubash~, a general agent.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Dubber~, the mouth or tongue; “mum your DUBBER,” hold your tongue.

~Dubsman~, or SCREW, a turnkey.—_Old Cant._

~Ducats~, money.—_Theatrical Slang._

~Duck~, a bundle of bits of the “stickings” of beef sold for food to the
London poor.—_See_ FAGGOT.

~Ducket~, a ticket of any kind. Generally applied to pawnbroker’s
duplicates and raffle cards. Probably from DOCKET.

~Ducks~, trousers. _Sea_ term. The expression most in use on land is
“white DUCKS,” _i.e._, white pantaloons or trousers.

~Ducks and Drakes~, “to make DUCKS AND DRAKES of one’s money,” to throw
it away childishly—derived from children “shying” flat stones on the
surface of a pool, which they call DUCKS AND DRAKES, according to the
number of skips they make.

~Dudder~, or DUDSMAN, a person who formerly travelled the country as a
pedlar, selling gown-pieces, silk waistcoats, &c., to countrymen. In
selling a waistcoat-piece, which cost him perhaps five shillings, for
thirty shillings or two pounds, he would show great fear of the revenue
officer, and beg the purchasing clodhopper to kneel down in a puddle of
water, crook his arm, and swear that it might never become straight if
he told an exciseman, or even his own wife. The term and practice are
nearly obsolete. In Liverpool, however, and at the East-end of London,
men dressed up as sailors, with pretended silk handkerchiefs and cigars
“only just smuggled from the Indies,” are still to be plentifully found.

~Dudeen~, or DUDHEEN, a short tobacco-pipe. Common term in Ireland and
the Irish quarters of London.

~Duds~, clothes, or personal property. _Gaelic_, DUD; _Ancient Cant_;
also _Dutch_.

~Duff~, to cheat, to sell spurious goods, often under pretence of their
being stolen or smuggled.

~Duff~, pudding; vulgar pronunciation of dough.—_Sea._

~Duffer~, a hawker of “Brummagem” or sham jewellery, or of shams of any
kind, a fool, a worthless person. DUFFER was formerly synonymous with
DUDDER, and was a general term given to pedlars. It is mentioned in the
_Frauds of London_ (1760) as a word in frequent use in the last century
to express cheats of all kinds.

~Duffer~, anything of no merit. A term applied by artists to a picture
below mediocrity, and by dealers in jewellery to any spurious article.
It is now general in its application to a worthless fellow.

~Duffing~, false, counterfeit, worthless.

~Duffy~, a term for a ghost or spirit among the West Indian negroes. In
all probability the DAVY JONES of sailors, and a contraction thereof
originally.

~Duke~, gin, a term amongst livery servants.

~Duke Humphrey.~ “To dine with DUKE HUMPHREY” is a euphuism for dining
not at all. Many reasons have been given for the saying, and the one
most worthy of credence is this:—Some visitors were inspecting the
abbey where the remains of Humphrey Duke of Gloucester lie, and one of
them was unfortunately shut in, and remained there _solus_ while his
companions were feasting at a neighbouring hostelry. He was afterwards
said to have dined with DUKE HUMPHREY, and the saying eventually passed
into a proverb.

~Dukes~, or DOOKS, the hands, originally modification of the rhyming
slang, “Duke of Yorks,” forks = fingers, hands—a long way round, but
quite true. The word is in very common use among low folk. “Put up your
DOOKS” is a kind invitation to fight.

~Dukey~, or DOOKEY, a penny gaff, which _see_.

~Dumbfound~, to perplex, to beat soundly till not able to speak.
Originally a cant word. Johnson cites the _Spectator_ for the earliest
use. _Scotch_, DUMBFOUNDER.

~Dummacker~, a knowing or acute person.

~Dummies~, empty bottles, and drawers in an apothecary’s shop, labelled
so as to give the idea of an extensive stock. Chandlers’ shop keepers
and small general dealers use dummies largely, half-tubs of butter,
bladders of lard, hams, cheeses, &c., being specially manufactured for
them. Dummies in libraries generally take the form of “Hume and
Smollett’s History of England” and other works not likely to tempt the
general reader.

~Dummy~, a deaf-and-dumb person; a clumsy, awkward fellow; any one
unusually thick-witted.

~Dummy~, in three-handed whist the person who holds two hands plays
DUMMY.

~Dummy~, a pocket-book. In this word the derivation is obvious, being
connected with DUMB, _i.e._, that which makes no sound. As a thieves’
term for a pocket-book, it is peculiarly applicable, for the contents of
pocket-books, bank-notes and papers, make no noise, while the money in a
purse may betray its presence by chinking.

~Dump fencer~, a man who sells buttons.

~Dumpish~, sullen or gloomy.

~Dumpy~, short and stout.

~Dun~, to solicit payment.—_Old Cant_, from the French DONNEZ, give; or
from JOE DIN, or DUN, a famous bailiff; or simply a corruption of DIN,
from the _Anglo-Saxon_ DUNAN, to clamour.

~Dunderhead~, a blockhead.

~Dundreary~, an empty swell.

~Dung~, an operative who works for an employer who does not give full or
“society” wages.

~Dungaree~, low, common, coarse, vulgar.—_Anglo-Indian._ DUNGAREE is
the name of a disreputable suburb of Bombay, and also of a coarse blue
cloth worn by sailors.

    “As smart a young fellow as ever you’d see,
    In jacket and trousers of blue DUNGAREE.”

~Dunkhorned~, sneaking, shabby. DUNKHORN in Norfolk is the short, blunt
horn of a beast, and the adjective is applied to a cuckold who has not
spirit to resist his disgrace.

~Dunnage~, baggage, clothes. Also, a sea term for wood or loose faggots
laid at the bottom of ships, upon which is placed the cargo.

~Dunnyken~, originally DANNAKEN, a watercloset.—From DANNA and KEN,
which _see_.

~Durrynacking~, offering lace or any other article as an introduction to
fortune-telling; generally practised by women.

~Dust~, money; “down with the DUST,” put down the money.—_Ancient._
Dean Swift once took for his text, “He who giveth to the poor lendeth to
the Lord.” His sermon was short. “Now, my brethren,” said he, “if you
are satisfied with the security, down with the DUST.”

~Dust~, a disturbance, or noise, “to raise a DUST,” to make a row.

~Dust~, to beat; “DUST one’s jacket,” _i.e._, give him a beating.

~Dust-hole~, Sidney Sussex College at Cambridge.—_Univ. Slang._

~Dust-hole~, the Queen’s Theatre, Tottenham Court Road, was so called
until comparatively recently, when it was entirely renovated and
renamed, and now, as the Prince of Wales’s, it is one of the most
fortunate and fashionable theatres in London.

~Dustoorie~, commission, douceur, bribe.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Dusty~, a phrase used in answering a question where one expects
approbation. “What do you think of this?” “Well, it’s not so DUSTY,”
_i.e._, not so bad; sometimes varied to “none so DUSTY.”

~Dutch~, or DOUBLE DUTCH, gibberish, or any foreign tongue. “To talk
DOUBLE DUTCH backwards on a Sunday” is a humorous locution for
extraordinary linguistic facility.

~Dutch auction~, a method of selling goods, adopted by “CHEAP JOHNS,” to
evade the penalties for selling without a licence. The article is
offered all round at a high price, which is then dropped until it is
taken. DUTCH AUCTIONS need not be illegitimate transactions, and their
economy (as likewise that of puffing) will be found minutely explained
in Sugden (Lord St. Leonards) “On Vendors and Purchasers.”

~Dutch concert~, where each performer plays a different tune. Sometimes
called a DUTCH MEDLEY when vocal efforts only are used.

~Dutch consolation~, “thank God it is no worse.” “It might have been
worse,” said a man whom the devil was carrying to hell. “How?” asked a
neighbour. “Well, he’s carrying me—he might have made me carry him.”

~Dutch courage~, false courage, generally excited by drink—pot-valour.

~Dutch feast~, where the host gets drunk before his guest.

~Dutch uncle~, a personage often introduced in conversation, but
exceedingly difficult to describe; “I’ll talk to him like a DUTCH
UNCLE!” conveys the notion of anything but a desirable relation.

~Earl of Cork~, the ace of diamonds.—_Hibernicism._

    “‘What do you mean by the Earl of Cork?’ asked Mr. Squander. ‘The
    ace of diamonds, your honour. It’s the worst ace, and the poorest
    card in the pack, and is called the EARL OF CORK, because he’s the
    poorest nobleman in Ireland.’”—_Carleton’s Traits and Stories of
    the Irish Peasantry._

~Early~, “to get up EARLY,” to prepare for a difficult task. “You’ll
have to get up very EARLY in the morning to beat that.” Early rising and
ability seem also closely connected by certain modifications of this
expression. Possibly the belief is that a man who rises early for early
rising’s sake deserves to be clever. Perhaps the greatest enjoyment a
day labourer—whose work commences at six in the winter mornings, and
who may have to rise at half-past four and trudge off—can have, is a
“quiet snooze” after the usual time of rising. The early rising in “the
steel” is the chief terror of that institution in the minds of habitual
criminals.

~Earwig~, a clergyman, also one who prompts another maliciously and
privately.

~Earwigging~, a private conversation; a rebuke in private; an attempt to
defame another unfairly, and without chance of appeal; a WIGGING is more
public.

~Ease~, to rob; “EASING a bloke,” robbing a man.

~Eat his head off.~ A horse who is kept idle in the stable is said to
EAT HIS HEAD OFF. Of late the phrase has been applied to servants who
have little to do but constantly “dip their noses in the manger.”

~Eavesdropper~, a listener. The name is derived from the punishment
which, according to Oliver, was directed in the Lectures, at the revival
of Masonry in 1717, to be inflicted on a detected Cowan [g. v.], and
which was

    “To be placed under the eaves of the house in rainy weather, till
    the water runs in at his shoulders and out at his heels.”—_Mackey’s
    Lexicon of Freemasonry._

~Efter~, a thief who frequents theatres.

~Egg~, or EGG ON, to excite, stimulate, or provoke one person to quarrel
with another, &c. From the Anglo-Saxon _eggian_; or possibly a
corruption of EDGE, or EDGE ON, or even from _agere_, to
drive.—_Ancient._

~Egg-flip~, or EGG-HOT, a drink made after the manner of purl and
bishop, with beer, eggs, and spirits made hot and sweetened.

~Elbow~, “to shake one’s ELBOW,” to play with dice; “to crook one’s
ELBOW,” to drink.

~Elbow grease~, labour, or industry. Anything that is rusty, or in
household work dirty or dingy, is said to require ELBOW GREASE.

~Elegant extracts~, a Cambridge University title for those students who
having failed only slightly in some one subject, and being “plucked”
accordingly, were allowed their degrees. This applied to the “Poll”
list, as the “Gulf” did to the “Honours.”

~Elephant~, “to have seen the ELEPHANT,” to be “_up_ to the latest
move,” or “_down_ to the last new trick;” to be knowing, and not
“green,” &c. Possibly a metaphor taken from the travelling menageries,
where the ELEPHANT is the finale of the exhibition.—Originally an
Americanism. Bartlett gives conflicting examples. General now, however.
A modification of this is “having seen the king.” When a man becomes
aware that he has been cheated or imposed on, and does not mean to stand
it any longer, he is said to have seen the king, _i.e._, to have seen
his adversary’s best card, and to be prepared for it.

~Elevated~, intoxicated. ELEVATION is the name of a drug-mixture much
used in the fen-counties for keeping up the spirits and preventing ague.
It consists mainly of opium.

~Enemy~, time, a clock, the ruthless enemy and tell-tale of idleness and
of mankind generally; “what says the ENEMY?” _i.e._, how goes the time?

~Essex lion~, a calf. A calf is probably the only lively animal to be
seen in a journey through Essex.

~Essex stile~, a ditch. A jocular allusion to the peculiarities of the
“low county.”

~Evaporate~, to go, or run away.

~Everlasting shoes~, the feet. The barefooted children about the Seven
Dials, and other low quarters of London, are said to wear EVERLASTING
SHOES and stockings. Another expression in connexion with this want is,
“the shoes and stockings their mothers gave them.”

~Everlasting staircase~, the treadmill. Sometimes, but very rarely now
called “Colonel Chesterton’s EVERLASTING STAIRCASE,” from the gallant
inventor or improver. Also known as “the STEPPER.”

~Exasperate~, to over-aspirate the letter H, or to aspirate it whenever
it commences a word, as is commonly done by under-educated people who
wish to show off their breeding. EXASPERATION does not refer to an
omission of the aspirate.

~Exes~, expenses. “Just enough to clear our exes.”

~Extensive~, frequently applied in a slang sense to a person’s
appearance or talk; “rather EXTENSIVE that!” intimating that the person
alluded to is showing off, or “cutting it fat.”

~Extracted~, placed on the list of “ELEGANT EXTRACTS.”—_Camb. Univ._

~Eye teeth~, supposed evidences of sharpness. A man is said to have, or
have not, cut his EYE TEETH, according to possession or want of
shrewdness.

~Eye water~, gin. Term principally used by printers.

~Face~, credit at a public-house, impudence, confidence, brass; thus a
BRAZEN-FACE. “To run one’s FACE,” is to obtain credit in a bounceable
manner. “He’s got some FACE,” _i.e._, he has got lots of impudence.

~Face entry~, the entrée to a theatre. From the FACE being known, as
distinguished from free-list entry.

~Facer~, a blow on the face. In Ireland, a dram.

~Facer~, a tumbler of whisky-punch. Possibly from the suffusion of blood
to the face caused by it.

~Fad~, a hobby, a favourite pursuit.

~Fadge~, a farthing.

~Fadge~, a flat loaf.—_North._

~Fadge~, to suit or fit; “it wont FADGE,” it will not do. Used by
Shakspeare, but now heard only in the streets.

~Fadger~, a glazier’s frame. Otherwise called a “frail,” perhaps in
reference to the fragile nature of its contents.

~Fag~, a schoolboy who performs a servant’s offices to a superior
schoolmate. From FAG, to become weary or tired out. _Low German_, FAKK,
wearied.

~Fag~, to beat.

~Faggot~, a bundle of bits of the “stickings” (hence probably its name)
sold for food to the London poor. It is sometimes called a duck. In
appearance it resembles a Scotch “haggis,” without, however, being
nearly so good as that fragrant article. Probably the FAG-END of a
thing, the inferior or remaining part, the refuse.

~Faggot~, a term of opprobrium used by low people to children and women;
“you little FAGGOT, you!” FAGGOT was originally a term of contempt for a
dry shrivelled old woman, whose bones were like a bundle of sticks, only
fit to burn.—Compare the French expression for a heretic, _sentir le
fagot_.

~Faggot briefs~, bundles of worthless papers tied up with red tape,
carried by unemployed barristers in the back rows of the courts to
simulate briefs.

~Faggot vote~, a phrase which belongs to the slang of politics, and
which was applied to a class of votes, by no means extinct even now,
though not so common as in the days preceding the first Reform Bill,
when constituencies were smaller, and individual votes were consequently
more valuable. FAGGOT VOTES were thus created:—A large landowner who
was blessed with, say, seven sons and seven brothers, and had also on
his estate fourteen labourers’ cottages worth about a shilling a week
each, would go through the form of sale of one cottage to each son and
each brother, it being perfectly understood that the title-deeds would
be returned when the occasion for their use was at an end. And thus the
squire would command fifteen votes instead of one. In a famous election
for the West Riding of Yorkshire during the third decade of the present
century, which cost upwards of half a million sterling, and ruined the
successful candidate, it was said that six hundred FAGGOT VOTES were
created by three noble lords. The origin of the term has been variously
explained. One ingenious writer has suggested that as a FAGGOT may be
split into a bundle of sticks, so was one estate thus split into a
bundle of votes. It is, however, more reasonable to suppose that it was
derived from the old word “FAGGOT,” which was used to describe a
“nominal soldier,” one, that is, whose name appeared on the muster-roll,
and for whom the colonel drew pay, but who was never to be found in the
ranks. The connexion is evident enough.

~Fake~, in the sporting world, means to hocus or poison. Fake is also a
mixture supposed to be used for purposes of “making safe.”

~Fake~, to cheat, or swindle; to do anything; to go on, or continue; to
make or construct; to steal or rob,—a verb variously used. FAKED, done,
or done for; “FAKE away, there’s no down;” go on, there is nobody
looking. From the _Latin_ FACERE.

~Fakement~, a false begging petition, any act of robbery, swindling, or
deception. FAKEMENT is a word of most general application among the
lower classes. Any things strange, and most things not strange, are
called FAKEMENTS, particularly if there is anything peculiar or artistic
in their production.

~Fakement Charley~, the owner’s private mark. FAKER, is one who makes or
FAKES anything. To “fake a cly,” is to pick a pocket.

~Fal-lals~, trumpery ornaments, gewgaws. Forby suggests as a derivation
the _Latin_ PHALERÆ, horse trappings.

~Fambles~, or FAMMS, the hands.—_Ancient Cant._ _German_, FANGEN.

~Family men~, or PEOPLE, thieves, or burglars.

~Fan~, a waistcoat.—_Houndsditch term._

~Fancy~, the favourite sports, pets, or pastime of a person, the ton of
low life. Pugilists are sometimes termed the FANCY. Shakspeare uses the
word in the sense of a favourite or pet; and the paramour of a
prostitute is still called her FANCY MAN.

~Fancy bloak~, a fancy or sporting man.

~Fanning~, a beating. FANNING is also stealing; CROSS-FANNING is
stealing with the arms crossed so as to distract attention, as in
stealing breast-pins, &c.

~Fanqui~, a European, literally foreign devil.—_Anglo-Chinese._

~Fantail~, a dustman’s or coalheaver’s hat. So called from the shape.

~Farm~, to contract, after the manner of those who engage to feed and
lodge children belonging to the parish, at so much a head; a fruitful
cause of starvation and misery. _See Oliver Twist._ The baby farmings,
unconnected with the parishes in which they occurred, which ultimately
resulted in the trial and execution of Margaret Waters, on the 11th
October, 1870, have caused the word FARM as applied to any dealings with
children, parish or private, to be one of obloquy and reproach.

~Farmer.~ In Suffolk this term is applied to the eldest son of the
occupier of the farm. In London it is used derisively of a countryman,
and denotes a farm-labourer or clodpole. Both senses are different from
the proper meaning.

~Fast~, gay, spreeish, unsteady, thoughtless,—an Americanism that has
of late ascended from the streets to the drawing-room. The word has
certainly now a distinct meaning, which it had not thirty years ago.
QUICK is the synonym for FAST, but a QUICK MAN would not convey the
meaning of a FAST MAN,—a person who, by late hours, gaiety, and
continual rounds of pleasure, lives too fast, and wears himself out. In
polite society a FAST young lady is one who affects mannish habits, or
makes herself conspicuous by some unfeminine accomplishment,—talks
slang, drives about in London, smokes cigarettes, is knowing in dogs,
horses, &c. An amusing anecdote is told of a fast young lady, the
daughter of a right reverend prelate, who was an adept in horseflesh.
Being desirous of ascertaining the opinion of a candidate for
ordination, who had the look of a bird of the same feather, as to the
merits of some cattle just brought to her father’s palace for her to
select from, she was assured by him they were utterly unfit for a lady’s
use. With a knowing look at the horses’ points, she gave her decision in
these choice words, “Well, I agree with you; they _are_ a rum lot, as
the devil said of the ten commandments.” Charles Dickens once said that
“fast,” when applied to a young man, was only another word for loose, as
he understood the term; and a fast girl has been defined as a woman who
has lost her respect for men, and for whom men have lost their respect.

~Fast~, embarrassed, wanting money, tied up. Sometimes synonymous with
“hard up.”—_Yorkshire._

~Fast and loose~, to play FAST AND LOOSE with a man, is to treat him as
a fast friend in the days while he is useful, and to cast him loose
when he is no longer necessary; also, to equivocate or vacillate. In old
days it was the name of a vulgar pastime. _See_ PRICK THE GARTER.

~Fat~, a printer’s term signifying the void spaces on a page, for which
he is paid at the same rate as for full or unbroken pages. Occasionally
called “grease,” and applied variously, but always as showing some undue
or uncommon amount of advantage.

~Fat~, rich, abundant, &c.; “a FAT lot;” “to cut it FAT,” to exaggerate,
to show off in an extensive or grand manner, to assume undue importance;
“cut up FAT,” see under CUT. As a theatrical term, a part with plenty of
FAT in it is one which affords the actor an opportunity of effective
display.

~Father~, or FENCE, a buyer of stolen property.

~Favourite~, the horse that has the lowest odds laid against it in the
betting list. When the FAVOURITE wins, the public or backers of horses
generally are the gainers. When an outsider wins, the ring, that is to
say, the persons who make a business of laying against the chances of
horses, are the gainers.

~Fawney~, a finger ring. _Irish_, FAINEE, a ring.

~Fawney bouncing~, selling rings for a pretended wager. This practice is
founded upon the old tale of a gentleman laying a wager that if he were
to offer “real gold sovereigns” at a penny a-piece at the foot of London
Bridge, the English public would be too incredulous to buy. The story
states that the gentleman stationed himself with sovereigns on a
tea-tray, and sold only two within the hour, thus winning the bet. This
tale the FAWNEY BOUNCERS tell the public, only offering brass,
double-gilt rings, instead of sovereigns.

~Fawney rig~, the ring-dropping trick. A few years ago this practice was
very common. A fellow purposely dropped a ring, or a pocket-book with
some little articles of jewellery, &c., in it, and when he saw any
person pick it up, ran to claim half. The ring found, the question of
how the booty was to be divided had then to be decided. The sharper
says, “If you will give me eight or nine shillings for my share, the
things are yours.” This the “flat” thinks very fair. The ring of course
is valueless, and the swallower of the bait discovers the trick too
late. For another way of doing this trick, _see_ RING-DROPPING.

~Feathers~, money, wealth; “in full FEATHER,” rich. FEATHERS is also a
term applied to dress; “in full FEATHER,” means very often in full
costume. It also means, at times, in high spirits.

~Feed~, a meal, generally a dinner. Originally stable slang, now pretty
general.

~Feele~, a daughter, or child.—Corrupted _French_.

~Fellow-commoner~, uncomplimentary epithet used at Cambridge for an
empty bottle.

~Felt~, a hat.—_Old term_, in use in the sixteenth century.

~Fence~, a purchaser or receiver of stolen goods; also, the shop or
warehouse of a FENCER.—_Old Cant._

~Fen-nightingales~, toads and frogs, from their continued croaking at
night.

~Feringee~, a European—that is, a Frank.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Ferricadouzer~, a knock-down blow, a good thrashing. Probably derived,
through the _Lingua Franca_, from the _Italian_, “far’ cader’ douser,”
to knock down. “Far’ cader’ morto,” is to knock down dead.

~Few~, used to signify the reverse, thus:—“Don’t you call this
considerably jolly?” “I believe you, my bo-o-oy, A FEW.” Sometimes the
reply is, “just a FEW.” Another expression of the same kind is RATHER,
which _see_.

~Fib~, to beat or strike.—_Old Cant._

~Fib~, to lie, to romance.

~Fibbing~, a series of blows delivered quickly, and at a short
distance.—_Pugilistic._

~Fiddle~, a sharper, “a street mugger.” In America, a swindle or an
imposture.

~Fiddle~, “to play second FIDDLE,” to act subordinately, or follow the
lead of another. From the orchestral practice.

~Fiddle-face~, a person with a wizened countenance.

~Fiddle-faddle~, twaddle, or trifling discourse.—_Old Cant._

~Fiddler~, a sharper, a cheat; also a careless, negligent, or dilatory
person. On board some ocean steamers the FIDDLER is the capstan-house,
the only place on board where passengers are permitted to smoke. The
term FIDDLER is easily traceable to the fact that, while the seamen are
working the capstan-bars, a man sometimes plays on the fiddle to cheer
them at their toil.

~Fiddler~, a sixpence. Fiddler’s money is small money; generally from
the old custom of each couple at a dance paying the fiddler sixpence.

~Fiddler~, or FADGE, a farthing.

~Fiddlers’ green~, the place where sailors expect to go when they die.
It is a place of fiddling, dancing, rum, and tobacco, and is undoubtedly
the “Land of Cocaigne,” mentioned in mediæval manuscripts. A story is
told of a drunken sailor who heard a street preacher threatening all
listeners with eternal damnation, and who went up and asked where he
(the sailor) was going after death. “To hell, of course,” replied the
preacher. “No, you lubberly son of a sea-cook!” shouted the seaman,
knocking the itinerant down; “I’m going to FIDDLER’S GREEN; and if you
say I’m not, I’ll throttle you.” Under compulsion, the preacher admitted
the existence of FIDDLER’S GREEN, _pro tempore_.

~Fiddles~, transverse pieces of wood used on shipboard to protect the
dishes at table during stormy weather. Swing tables obviate the use of
FIDDLES.

~Fiddle-sticks!~ an exclamation signifying nonsense. Sometimes
“Fiddle-de-dee.”

~Fiddling~, doing any odd jobs in the streets, holding horses, carrying
parcels, &c., for a living. Among the middle classes, FIDDLING means
idling away time, or trifling, and amongst sharpers it means gambling.

~Fid-fad~, a game similar to chequers, or drafts, played in the West of
England.

~Field~, the whole of the runners in a race of any kind. “A FIELD of
fourteen runners was placed in care of the starter.” In betting
phraseology the FIELD represents the bulk of the horses, as opposed to
the favourite. “The FIELD for a pony,” means that the offerer will lay
25_l._ against the favourite, preferring the chances of a winner turning
up amongst the others. “Ten to one on the FIELD,” means that the price
named can be obtained about any horse in the race, that being the lowest
figure or favourite’s price. Laying against favourites is called
FIELDING, and bookmakers are often known as FIELDERS.

~Field~, “to look out,” at cricket. In the outings of an eleven the
FIELDERS are those who stand away from the wickets with a view to
checking the progress of the ball. FIELDING is a great essential to
cricket, and to be “a good FIELD” is no slight honour. Also to lay
against favourites in the betting.

~Field-lane duck~, a baked sheep’s head. Field Lane was a low London
thoroughfare leading from the foot of Holborn Hill to the purlieus of
Clerkenwell. It was formerly the market for stolen pocket-handkerchiefs.
Holborn Viaduct improved all but a small portion of Field Lane off the
face of the earth. There is but the smallest vestige of this famous (or
infamous) thoroughfare left. The neighbourhood has received an upheaval
within the past few years, and from one end the pedestrian must descend
to the remains of Field Lane by means of a flight of steps.

~Fieri-facias.~ A red-faced man is often jocularly said to have been
served with a writ of FIERI-FACIAS.

~Fi-fa~, a writ of Fieri-Facias.—_Legal._

~Fi-fi~, Thackeray’s term for Paul de Kock’s novels, and similar modern
French literature.

~Fig~, “in full FIG,” _i.e._, full-dress costume, “extensively got up.”
Possibly an allusion to the dress assumed by our first parents after
they were naked and not ashamed, or else an abbreviation of figure, in
the references to plates in books of fashions.

~Fig~, “to FIG a horse,” to play improper tricks with one in order to
make him lively. The FIG is a piece of wet ginger placed under a horse’s
tail for the purpose of making him appear lively, and enhance his price.

~Figaro~, a barber; from _Le Nozze di Figaro_.

~Fig-leaf~, a small apron worn by ladies.

~Figure~, “to cut a good or bad FIGURE,” to make good or indifferent
appearance; “what’s the FIGURE?” how much is to pay? FIGURE-HEAD, a
person’s face.—_Sea term._

~Filch~, to steal, or purloin. Originally a cant word, derived from the
FILCHES, or hooks, thieves used to carry, to hook clothes, or any
portable articles from open windows.—_Vide_ Decker. It was considered a
cant or gipsy term up to the beginning of the last century. Harman has
“FYLCHE, to robbe.” Probably from “FILICHI,” Romany for a handkerchief.

~File~, a deep or artful man, a jocose name for a cunning person.
Originally a term for a pickpocket, when to FILE was to cheat or rob.
FILE, an artful man, was used in the thirteenth and fourteenth
centuries. To deal with an artful man is sometimes said to be like
biting a FILE.

~Filibuster~, an American adventurer, who, if successful, helps to
extend the boundaries of the United States, becomes a General, and
receives high honours, but who remains a FILIBUSTER, and is despised as
such, if he fails. The Texan, Nicaraguan, and kindred expeditions were
of a FILIBUSTERING order.

~Fillibrush~, to flatter, praise ironically.

~Fimble-famble~, a lame, prevaricating excuse.—_Scandinavian._

~Fin~, a hand; “come, tip us your FIN,” viz., let us shake
hands.—_Sea._

~Finder~, one who FINDS bacon and meat at the market before they are
lost, _i.e._, steals them.

~Finnuf~, a five-pound note. DOUBLE FINNUF, a ten-pound note.—_German_,
FUNF, five.

~Fire-eater~, a quarrelsome man, a braggadocio or turbulent person who
is always ready to fight.

~Firkytoodle~, to cuddle or fondle.

~First flight~, the first lot to finish in a foot or horse race, in a
fox hunt, &c.

~Fish~, a person; “a queer FISH,” “a loose FISH.” Term never used except
in doubtful cases, as those quoted.

~Fishfag~, originally a Billingsgate fishwife; now any scolding,
vixenish, foul-mouthed woman.

~Fishy~, doubtful, unsound, rotten; used to denote a suspicion of a
“screw being loose,” or “something rotten in the state of Denmark,” in
referring to any proposed speculation.

~Fit~, an Americanism denoting the preterite of the verb to fight. A
Yankee once came upon the words _nihil fit_, and he immediately wrote
off to the editor of the paper to which he subscribed to know “Who was
Nihil, who he fit, what amount he fit for, and if he won.”

~Five fingers~, the five of trumps, at the game of Five-cards, or Don.

~Fives~, “bunch of FIVES,” the fist.

~Fix~, a predicament, or dilemma; “an awful FIX,” a terrible position;
“to FIX one’s flint for him,” _i.e._, to “settle his hash,” to “put a
spoke in his wheel.”

~Fixings~, an Americanism, equivalent to our word “trimmings,” which
_see_.

~Fiz~, champagne; any sparkling wine.

~Fizzing~, first-rate, very good, excellent; synonymous with “stunning.”

~Flabbergast~, or FLABBERGHAST, to astonish, or strike with wonder;
literally, to strike aghast.—_Old._

~Flag~, a groat, or 4_d._—_Ancient Cant._

~Flag~, an apron. People who wear their aprons when not at work, are
called “flag-flashers.”

~Flag of distress~, any overt sign of poverty; the end of a person’s
shirt when it protrudes through his trousers.

~Flam~, nonsense, blarney, a lie, humbug. “A regular FLAM,” a tale
devoid of truth.

~Flame~, a sweetheart.

~Flannel~, or HOT FLANNEL, the old term for gin and beer, drunk hot,
with nutmeg, sugar, &c.; a play on the old name “lambswool.” Also called
“flip.” There is an anecdote told of Goldsmith helping to drink a quart
of FLANNEL in a night-house, in company with George Parker, Ned Shuter,
and a demure, grave-looking gentleman, who continually introduced the
words “crap,” “stretch,” “scrag,” and “swing.” Upon the Doctor asking
who this strange person might be, and being told his profession, he
rushed from the place in a frenzy, exclaiming, “Good God! and have I
been sitting all this while with a hangman!”

~Flap~, lead used for the coverings of roofs.

~Flapper~, or FLIPPER, the hand.

~Flare up~, a jovial social gathering, a “breakdown,” a “row.”

~Flash~, showy, smart, knowing; a word with various meanings. A person
is said to be dressed FLASH when his garb is showy, and after a fashion,
but without taste. A person is said to be FLASH when he apes the
appearance or manners of his betters, or when he is trying to be
superior to his friends and relations. FLASH also means “fast,” roguish,
and sometimes infers counterfeit or deceptive—and this, perhaps, is its
general signification. As it is used by those who best understand it
nowadays, the word means that which is not what it appears to
be—anything spurious, as jewellery and shoddy clothes. “FLASH, my young
friend, or slang, as others call it, is the classical language of the
Holy Land; in other words, St. Giles’s Greek.”—_Tom and Jerry_, by
Moncreiff. Vulgar language was first termed FLASH in the year 1718, by
Hitchin, author of “_The Regulator of Thieves, &c., with account of
flash words_.” “FLASH” is sometimes exchangeable with “fancy.”

    “My FLASH man’s in quod,
    And I’m the gal that’s willin,
    So I’ll turn out to-night,
    And earn an honest shillin’.

    “Tooral, looral la,
    What are wealth’s possessions?
    Bless the man we love,
    And blow the b---- Sessions.”—_Lyra Flagitiosa._

~Flash it~, show it—said when any bargain is offered.

~Flash o’ lightning~, the gold band on an officer’s cap.—_Sea._ Also in
street slang, a glass of gin.

~Flat~, a fool, a silly or “soft” person; the opposite of “sharp.” The
terms appear to be shortenings for “sharp-witted” and “flat-witted.” Or,
maybe, from musical notes.

~Flat-feet~, the battalion companies in the Foot Guards.

~Flats~, playing cards; sometimes called “broads.” Also the storeys of
large houses, built on the “independent” principle, each flat having
its separate and peculiar offices, street-door, &c.

~Flatty~, a rustic, or uninitiated person.

~Flatty-ken~, a public-house the landlord of which is ignorant of the
practices of the thieves and tramps who frequent it.

~Flay the fox~, to vomit. Now replaced by the more popular “shoot the
cat.”

~Flemish account.~—_Old._ Still used by sailors for a tangled and
unsatisfactory account or reckoning.

~Flesh and blood~, brandy and port in equal quantities.

~Flesh bag~, a shirt. American humourists call a white shirt a “clean
biled rag.” In the mining camps, and rough parts generally, a white
shirt is called a “biled shirt” to distinguish it from the usual woollen
garment, which cannot be boiled.

~Flick~, or OLD FLICK, a comical old chap or fellow. Term of endearment
among low people.

~Flick~, or FLIG, to whip by striking, and drawing the lash back at the
same time, which causes a stinging blow. A flicking is often
administered by schoolboys with a damp towel or pocket-handkerchief.

~Flies~, trickery, nonsense. “There are no FLIES about me, sir.”
Softening of lies.

~Flim-flamn~, idle story.—_Beaumont and Fletcher._

~Flimp~, to hustle, or rob.

~Flimsy~, a bank-note. Bank of Elegance notes are sometimes called soft
flimsies. In this particular case two good terms make a bad one, as both
“soft” and “flimsies” used separately refer to good notes.

~Flimsy~, the thin prepared copying-paper used by newspaper reporters
and “penny-a-liners” for making several copies at once, which enables
them to supply different papers with the same article without loss of
time.

~Flint~, an operative who works for a “society” master, _i.e._, for full
wages.

~Flip~, corruption of FILLIP, a light blow. Also a hot drink. _See_
FLANNEL.

~Flip-flap~, a peculiar rollicking dance indulged in by costermongers
when merry or excited—better described, perhaps, as the “double-shuffle”
danced with an air of extreme _abandon_. Also, a kind of somersault,
in which the performer throws himself over on his hands and feet
alternately.

~Flipper~, the hand; “give us your FLIPPER,” give me your hand.—_Sea._
Metaphor taken from the flipper or paddle of a turtle.

~Floater~, a small suet dumpling put into soup.—_Whitechapel._

~Floating academy~, the hulks.

~Flog~, to whip. Cited both by Grose and the author of _Bacchus and
Venus_ as a cant word. Many efforts have been made to ascertain the
earliest use; Richardson cites Lord Chesterfield. From _Flagellum_.
“Flawged,” for whipped, occurs in “The Presbyterian Lash, or Nockhoff’s
Maid Whipt,” published in 1663. Nockhoff was the anagram for the name
of the Rev. Zachary Crofton, who had scandalized the town by subjecting
his servant-maid to the discipline of the nursery. There is a good story
on the proper orthography of the convertible term for castigation
related in a newspaper of 1841. A county magistrate, who had sentenced a
boy to be birched, wrote in his warrant that the boy was to be “floged.”
The scrupulous gaoler hesitated to inflict the punishment, and sent back
the warrant to the justice for amendment, who thereupon drew his pen
through “floged,” and ordered the boy to be “wiped.”

~Flogger~, a whip.—_Almost obsolete._ FLOGGER is still the term applied
to a number of strips of cloth attached to a handle, and used in
theatrical painting rooms to beat off the dust of the charcoal used in
sketching a scene.

~Flogster~, one addicted to flogging. William IV., who was accused of
unduly and excessively punishing the sailors whom he commanded when in
the navy, was nicknamed in the newspapers “Prince William Henry
FLOGSTER.”

~Floor~, to knock down.—_Pugilistic._

~Floored~, when a picture is hung on the lowest row at the Exhibition of
the Royal Academy, it is, in artistic slang, said to be FLOORED, in
contradistinction to “skyed,” which _see_.

~Floorer~, a blow sufficiently strong to knock a man down, or bring him
to the floor. Often used in reference to sudden and unpleasant news.

~Flop~, to plump; “to go FLOP down,” to fall suddenly, with violence and
noise.

~Flowery~, lodging, or house entertainment; “square the omee for the
FLOWERY,” pay the master for the lodging.—_Lingua Franca._

~Flue-faker~, a chimney-sweep.

~Fluff it~, a term of disapprobation, implying “take it away, I don’t
want it.”

~Fluff~, railway ticket clerks’ slang for short change given by them.
The profits thus accruing are called “fluffings,” and the practice is
known as “fluffing.”

~Fluke~, at billiards, playing for one thing and getting another. Hence,
generally what one gets accidentally, as an unexpected advantage, “more
by luck than judgment.”

~Flummery~, flattery, gammon, genteel nonsense. In American ships a
peculiar kind of light sweet pudding.

~Flummux~, to perplex or hinder.

~Flummuxed~, done up, sure of a month in quod, or prison. In mendicant
freemasonry, the sign chalked by rogues and tramps upon a gate-post or
house corner, to express to succeeding vagabonds that it is unsafe for
them to call there, is known as ⦿, or FLUMMUXED, which signifies that
the only thing they would be likely to get upon applying for relief
would be a “month in quod.”—_See_ QUOD.

~Flunkey~, a footman or other man-servant.

~Flunkeyism~, blind worship of rank, birth, or riches, or of all three;
toadyism.

~Flush~, the opposite of “hard up,” in possession of money, not
poverty-stricken.—_Shakspeare._

~Flush~, to whip; “FLUSHED on the horse,” to be privately whipped in
gaol; to deluge with water, as in “FLUSHING the sewers;” to come upon
suddenly and completely,—“I came FLUSH upon him.”

~Flush~, a term in cribbage, signifying a hand of cards composed
entirely of one suit.

~Flutter~, to try hard in defence or pursuit of an object. “I’ll have a
FLUTTER for it,” means I’ll have a good try for it. Also to toss for
anything. Probably from the spinning of the coin.

~Fly~, knowing, wide-awake, fully understanding another’s meaning.

~Fly~, TO BE ON THE, to be out for a day’s drink or pleasure.

~Fly~, to lift, toss, or raise; “FLY the mags,” _i.e._, toss up the
halfpence; “to FLY a window,” _i.e._, to lift one for the purpose of
stealing.

~Fly-boys~, men employed to clear the printed copies from the Hoe
machines, on which daily papers are “worked.” So called to distinguish
them from the “machine boys,” a superior grade of labourers who “lay on”
the sheets.

~Flying mare~, a throw in wrestling.

~Flying mess~, “to be in FLYING MESS” is a soldier’s phrase for being
hungry and having to mess where he can.

~Flying stationer~, a paper-worker, hawker of penny ballads; “Printed
for the Flying Stationers” is the _imprimatur_ on hundreds of penny
histories and sheet songs of the last and present centuries.

~Flymy~, knowing, cunning, roguish.—_Seven Dials and Low Life._

~Fly the kite~, or RAISE THE WIND, to obtain money on bills, whether
good or bad, probably in allusion to tossing paper about as children do
kites.

~Fly the kite~, to evacuate from a window,—term used in padding-kens,
or low lodging-houses.

~Fobbed~, old slang for robbed. From FOB, the ancient breeches-pocket
for the watch.

~Fogey~, or OLD FOGEY, a dullard, an old-fashioned or singular person.
Grose says it is a nickname for an invalid soldier, from the French
_fougueux_, fierce or fiery, but it has lost this signification now.

~Fogger~, old word for a huckster.

~Fogger~, a farm servant who feeds cattle. Probably a corruption of
fodderer.

~Foggy~, tipsy.

~Fogle~, a silk handkerchief,—not a clout, which is of cotton. It has
been hinted that this may have come from the German _Vogel_, a bird,
from the bird’s-eye spots on some handkerchiefs, but a more probable
derivation is the Italian slang (_Fourbesque_), FOGLIA, a pocket, or
purse; or from the French Argot, FOUILLE, also a pocket.

~Fogus~, tobacco.—_Ancient Cant._ FOGO, old word for stench.

~Follow-me-lads~, curls hanging over a lady’s shoulder.

~Foont~, a sovereign, or 20_s._ Probably a corruption of vingt.

~Footing~, “to pay FOOTING.” _See_ SHOE.

~Forakers~, the closet of decency, or house of office. Term used by the
boys at Winchester School. Very likely from “four acres,” the original
necessary having been in all likelihood a field behind the school.

~Force the voucher~, a term in use among sporting tricksters, who
advertise to send certain winners, and on receipt of letters enclose
vouchers similar to those sent out by respectable commission agents, but
with double or treble the current odds marked thereon, in reference to
the horse named. A plausible letter is sent with the voucher, and the
victim is informed that on account of early investments made by the
firm, which has of course a high-sounding title, the extra odds can be
laid by them, and a remittance to the amount named, or part of it, is
requested. Of course the firm “dries up” when claims become heavy, and,
with a new name and new address, appears in the next week’s advertising
columns. FORCING THE VOUCHER was a fine game when it was first started,
but it was soon overdone, as it required no particular ingenuity, and
offered special immunities, theft of this kind being rather favoured
than otherwise by the authorities. Certainly the law that punishes
honest betting men seems powerless with regard to these plunderers,
otherwise we should hardly be treated as often as we are to the
spectacle of one man being fined for honest dealing, while another
escapes simply because he is not a betting man, but a welcher.

~Fork out~, to bring out one’s money, to pay the bill, to “stand for” or
treat a friend; to hand over what does not belong to you—old cant term
for picking pockets, and very curious in its origin. In the early part
of the last century, a little book was published on purloining, and of
course it had to give the latest modes. FORKING was the newest mode, and
it consisted in thrusting the fingers stiff and open into the pocket,
and then quickly closing them and extracting any article thus caught.

~Forks~, or GRAPPLING-IRONS, fingers. Costermongers and other clumsy
feeders have a proverb which seems to justify their taking bones and
choice morsels in their hands during the progress of a meal. It is,
“Fingers were the first FORKS;” sometimes varied to “Fingers were made
before FORKS.”

~Form~, condition, training. “In good FORM” or “in bad FORM” refers to a
man’s or horse’s state of being in the sporting world. FORM has also had
a moral significance of late years, and with the qualifying adjectives
attached as occasion requires, is extensively used in general
conversation. As, “It was bad FORM of Brown to do that.” “That article
was bad FORM.” In the latter cases the word “in” rarely appears.

~Forty foot~, a derisive appellation for a very short person.

~Forty guts~, vulgar term for a fat man.

~Forty-twa~, the common place of retirement on a well-known French plan
at Edinburgh, so called from its accommodating that number of persons at
once.

~Forty winks~, a short sleep or nap.

~Fou~, rather more than slightly intoxicated.—_Scotch._

    “We are na’ FOU, we are na’ FOU.”

~Foul~, to jostle or bore unfairly in a race. _See_ BORE. To touch any
foreign substance during a race—particularly a boat-race—is to FOUL
it.

~Foul~, a touch, no matter how slight, of bodies or machinery in a race
of any kind. FOULS in boat-racing are often inevitable, and are not
always the result of boring or any other malicious practice.

~Foul riding~, riding which after a horse-race is made the subject of
complaint, such as refusing to let a competitor pass, boring him against
the rails, &c. Some jockeys are great adepts at this work, and are
invaluable to a confederacy as a means, not so much of attaining victory
themselves, as of preventing its attainment in others. Of course unless
proof of jostling can be given, or evidence of malicious intent shown,
jockeyship of this kind is not considered foul riding.

~Four-and-nine~, or FOUR-AND-NINEPENNY GOSS, a cheap hat, so called from
4_s._ 9_d._, the price at which a once noted advertising hat-maker sold
his hats—

    “Whene’er to slumber you incline,
    Take a short nap at 4 and 9.”

~Four-eyes~, a man or woman who habitually wears spectacles.

~Four kings~, HISTORY OF THE, an old name for a pack of playing cards.
_See_ Sir Thomas Urquhart’s _Translation of Rabelais_. In _Argot_, LIVRE
DES QUATRE ROIS.

~Fourth~, or FOURTH COURT, the court appropriated to the waterclosets at
Cambridge; from its really being No. 4 at Trinity College. A man leaving
his room to go to the FOURTH COURT, writes on his door, in algebraic
notation, GONE^4, which expresses the Cambridge slang phrase, “gone to
the FOURTH.”

~Fourth estate~, the complete body of journalists of all descriptions.
This term is much in use among “liners.”

~Fox~, to cheat or rob.—_Eton College._ In London to watch closely and
narrowly.

~Foxed~, a term used by print and book collectors to denote the brown
spotted appearance produced by damp on paper.

~Foxing~, when one actor criticises another’s
performance.—_Theatrical._ Also in street slang FOXING means watching
slyly.

~Fox’s Sleep~, or FOXING, a purposely assumed indifference to what is
going on. A fox, as well as a weasel, is said to sleep with one eye
open.

~Foxy~, rank, tainted, from the odour of the animal.—_Lincolnshire._

~Foxy~, said also of a red-haired person.

~Frapping~, a beating. _French_, FRAPPER.

~Free-and-easy~, a club held at a low public-house, the members of which
meet in the tap-room or parlour for the purpose of drinking, smoking,
and hearing each other sing. These gatherings are generally called
harmonic meetings by the landlord, but FREE-AND-EASY best indicates the
character of the proceedings.

~Free fight~, a fight conducted on the Irishman’s principle—“Sure,
wherever you see a head, hit it.” The term is, however, American, so the
practice may be considered fairly general.

~Freeman’s quay~, “drinking at FREEMAN’S QUAY,” _i.e._, at another’s
cost. This quay was formerly a celebrated wharf near London Bridge, and
the saying arose from the beer which was given gratis to porters and
carmen who went there on business.

~French cream~, brandy.

~French gout~, a certain disease, which is also known as “ladies’
fever.”

~French leave~, TO TAKE, to leave or depart slyly, without saying
anything; or obtaining permission.

~Fresh~, said of a person slightly intoxicated.

~Freshman~, a University man during his first year. The official
appellation for the students until they have passed the Previous or
First Cambridge Examination, otherwise called the Smalls or Little Go,
is Junior Sophs or Sophisters. After this they are Senior Sophs until
their last term, when they are Questionists, or preparing “_ad
respondendum quæstioni_.” At Oxford the title FRESHMAN lasts for the
first term.

~Friday-face~, a gloomy-looking man. Most likely from FRIDAY being a day
of meagre fare among Catholics and High Church Protestants.

~Frisk~, to search; FRISKED, searched by a constable or other officer.

~Frisk a cly~, to empty a pocket.

~Frog~, a policeman. Because, by a popular delusion, he is supposed to
pounce suddenly on delinquents.

~Frog’s march~, the manner in which four or more policemen carry a
drunken or turbulent man to the station-house. The victim is held face
downwards, one constable being at each shoulder, while the others hold
on above the knees. Often there is another active and intelligent
officer who beats time to the march on the recalcitrant hero’s
posteriors.

~Frontispiece~, the face.

~Frow~, a girl, or wife. _German_, FRAU; _Dutch_, VROUW.

~Frummagemmed~, annihilated, strangled, garrotted, or spoilt.—_Old
Cant._

~Frump~, a slatternly woman, a gossip.—_Ancient._ In modern slang it is
the feminine of FOGEY, and means a prim old lady, who is generally
termed “a regular old FRUMP.”

~Frump~, to mock or insult.—_Beaumont and Fletcher._

~F sharps~, fleas. Compare B FLATS.

~Fudge~, nonsense, stupidity. Todd and Richardson only trace the word to
Goldsmith. Disraeli, however, gives the origin to a Captain Fudge, a
great fibber, who told monstrous stories, which made his crew say in
answer to any improbability, “You FUDGE it!”—_See Remarks on the Navy_,
1700. At page 87 of a collection of some papers of William Crouch (8vo,
1712), the Quaker, we find a mention of this Captain. Degory Marshall
informed Crouch that—

    “In the year 1664 we were sentenced for banishment to Jamaica by
    Judges Hyde and Twisden, and our number was 55. We were put on board
    the ship Black Eagle; the master’s name was FUDGE, by some called
    LYING FUDGE.”

Some persons believe that the word comes from the _Gaelic_, FFUG,
deception.

~Fuggies~, hot rolls.—_School._

~Full against~, opposed to. As, “I’m FULL AGAINST him,” I decidedly
object to, or dislike him, or I am opposed to him. The term originated
with the bookmakers; who, when they have laid all their money against a
certain horse, put a mark against his name, and reply to all inquiries,
“FULL AGAINST him.” This grew to “FULL AGAINST his winning,” and was
thus taken, when shortened, to express feeling the reverse of friendly.

~Fullams~, false dice, which always turn up high.—_Shakspeare._

~Full blast~, a term evidently borrowed from the technology of the
engine-room, and now frequently used to express the heyday or apogee of
anything. As, “By the middle of the day matters were in FULL BLAST, and
proceedings generally were very satisfactory.”

~Full feather~, good condition, high spirits. Also any one gaily dressed
is said to be in FULL FEATHER.

~Full fig~, full costume, male or female uniform or evening dress.

~Full of beans~, arrogant, purseproud. A person whom sudden prosperity
has made offensive and conceited, is said to be too “FULL OF BEANS.”
Originally stable slang.

~Fully~, “to be FULLIED,” to be committed for trial. Term in general use
among thieves. Possibly from the reports which, in the slang of the
penny-a-liner, say “the prisoner was FULLY committed for trial.” The
magistrates often say FULLY committed also, whatever that may mean.

~Funk~, trepidation, nervousness, cowardice. To FUNK, to be afraid or
nervous.

~Funk~, to smoke out, or terrify.

~Funking the cobbler~, a bold schoolboy trick, performed with assafœtida
and cotton stuffed into a hollow tube or cow’s horn. The cotton being
lighted, the smoke is blown in through the keyhole of a door, or the
crannies of a cobbler’s stall. A funny song, much in vogue some years
back, gave all the agonies of a drunken cobbler, who believed the devil
had come for him, with all sorts of accessories, till

            “He was told by a shout
    That ’twas only some boys who’d been FUNKING him out.”

~Funny~, a rowing boat with both ends pointed and out of the water.

~Funny-bone~, the extremity of the elbow—or rather, the muscle which
passes round it between the two bones, a blow on which causes painful
tingling in the fingers. Facetiously derived, from its being the
extremity of the _humerus_ (humorous).

~Fye-buck~, a sixpence.—_Nearly obsolete._

~Gab~, GABBER or GABBLE, talk; “gift of the GAB,” loquacity, or natural
talent for speech-making.—_Anglo-Norman_; GAB is also found in the
_Danish_ and _Old Norse_.

~Gaby~, a simpleton, a country bumpkin. Probably from gape.

~Gad~, a trapesing slatternly woman.—_Gipsy._ _Anglo-Saxon_, GÆDELING.

~Gadding the hoof~, going without shoes. GADDING, roaming about,
although used in an old translation of the Bible, is now only heard
amongst the lower orders.

~Gaff~, a penny play-house, in which talking is not permitted on the
stage. _See_ PENNY GAFF.

~Gaffer~, a master, or employer; term used by “navvies,” and general in
Lancashire and North of England. Early English for an old man. _See_
“BLOW THE GAFF.”

~Gaffing~, tossing halfpence, or counters.—_North_, where it means
tossing up three halfpennies. One man tosses, and another calls.
Sometimes the coins are tossed from a stick, and the tosser keeps those
which fall heads uppermost.

~Gag~, a lie; “a GAG he told to the beak.”—_Thieves’ Cant._

~Gag~, language introduced by an actor into his part. In certain pieces
this is allowed by custom, and these are called GAG-PIECES. _The Critic,
or a Tragedy Rehearsed_, is chief among these. Many actors, however,
take French leave in this respect with most pieces.—_Theatrical slang._

    MR. ROBSON AT BELFAST.—We (_Northern Whig_) suspected a little bit
    of what is professionally termed GAG in Mr. Robson’s _Daddy
    Hardacre_ last night. He had occasion to say that one of the
    characters in the piece “understands me well enough,” to which he
    added—“I wish some other people did the same,” with an expressive
    glance at the pit; which we interpreted as having special reference
    to those appreciative persons in the audience whom we have already
    mentioned, who think it absolutely needful to roar with laughter at
    every sentence Mr. Robson utters, without the least regard to
    whether it be humorous or pathetic—only because Mr. Robson has fame
    as a comic actor.

When another Robson shall arise, no one will object to his GAGGING a
little. The public could afford that to such a man in these days of
“creations.”

~Gag~, to hoax, “take a rise” out of one; to “cod.”

~Gage~, a small quantity of anything; as “a GAGE of tobacco,” meaning a
pipeful; “a GAGE of gin,” a glassful. GAGE was, in the last century, a
chamber utensil.

~Galeny~, old cant term for a fowl of any kind; now a respectable word
in the West of England, signifying a Guinea fowl.—_Vide_ Grose.
_Latin_, GALLINA.

~Gallanty show~, an exhibition in which black figures are shown on a
white sheet to accompanying dialogue. Generally given at night by “Punch
and Judy” men.

~Gallimaufry~, a kind of stew, made up of scraps of various kinds. Sea
term, and probably meaning the galley scraps.

~Gallipot~, an apothecary.

~Gallivant~, to wait upon the ladies.—_Old._

~Gallows~, or GALLUS, very, or exceedingly—an unpleasant exclamation;
“GALLOWS poor,” very poor. Term originally applied to anything bad
enough to deserve hanging.

~Gallows bird~, an incorrigible thief; often applied to denote a
ruffian-like appearance.

~Gallowses~, in the North of England a pair of braces.

~Gally-yarn~, a sailor’s term for a hoaxing story. He expresses
disbelief by saying only “G. Y.”

~Galoot.~—_See_ GEELOOT.

~Galore~, abundance. _Irish_, GO LEOR, in plenty.

~Gamb~, a leg. Still used as an heraldic term, as well as by thieves,
who probably get it from the _Lingua Franca_. _Italian_, GAMBA;
_French_, JAMBE, a leg.

~Game~, a term variously applied; “are you GAME?” have you courage
enough? “what’s your little GAME?” what are you going to do? “come, none
of your GAMES,” be quiet, don’t annoy me; “on the GAME,” out thieving.
To “play the GAME” is among sporting men to do a thing thoroughly and
properly.

~Game leg~, a lame or wounded leg.

~Gameness~, pluck, endurance, courage generally.

~Gammon~, deceit, humbug, a false and ridiculous story. _Anglo-Saxon_,
GAMEN, game, sport.

~Gammon~, to hoax, to deceive merrily, to laugh at a person, to tell an
untrue but plausible story, to make game of, or, in the provincial
dialect, to make GAME on;—“who’s thou makin’ thy GAM’ on?” _i.e._, of
whom are you making a fool?—_Yorkshire._

~Gammy~, bad, unfavourable, poor tempered. Those householders who are
known enemies to the street folk and tramps are pronounced by them to be
GAMMY. GAMMY sometimes means forged, as “GAMMY-MONNIKER,” a forged
signature; GAMMY STUFF, spurious medicine; GAMMY LOWR, counterfeit coin.
_Hants_, GAMY, dirty. The hieroglyphic used by beggars and cadgers to
intimate to those of the tribe coming after that things are not very
favourable is known as □, or GAMMY. _Gaelic_, _Welsh_, and _Irish_, CAM
(GAM), crooked.

~Gammy-vial~ (Ville), a town where the police will not let persons hawk.

~Gander Month~, the period when the monthly nurse is in the ascendant,
and the husband has to shift for himself. Probably from the open choice
he has during that period.

~Ganger~, the person who superintends the work of a gang, or a number of
navigators.

~Gape~, to stare about in an astonished manner. “GAPING about like a
country bumpkin.” Sometimes pronounced GARP. There is no reference in
the use of this phrase by Cockneys to GAPE in its correct sense.

~Gape-seed~, something to look at, cause for astonishment; a lazy
fellow, unmindful of his work, is said to be “looking for GAPE-SEED.”
Rustics are said to find plenty of “GAPE-SEED” in London streets.

~Gar~, euphuistic rendering of the title of the Deity; “be GAR, you
don’t say so!”—_Franco-English._

~Garden~, among tradesmen signifies Covent GARDEN Market; among
theatrical performers, Covent GARDEN Theatre.

~Gardener~, an awkward coachman; an insinuation that he is both coachman
and gardener, and understands the latter branch of service better than
the first; “get on, GARDENER,” is a most insulting expression from a
cabby to a real coachman. Men who in small families do the coach,
garden, and general work, are sometimes called “teakettle grooms,” or
“teakettle coachmen.”

~Gargle~, medical-student slang for drinkables.

~Garnish~, the douceur or fee which, before the time of Howard the
philanthropist, was openly exacted by the keepers of gaols from their
unfortunate prisoners for extra comforts. The practice of garnishing is
by no means so defunct as some folk seem to think, and its influence may
often be traced by those who wish.

~Garnish~, footing money.—_Yorkshire._

~Garreter~, a thief who crawls over the tops of houses, and enters
garret-windows. Called also a “dancer,” or “dancing-master,” from the
light and airy nature of his occupation.

~Garrotte~, a system of robbery with violence much practised on dark
winter nights by ruffians who during summer infest racecourses and
fairs. Their victims are generally weak men and delicate women. From the
Spanish GARROTTE, because the practice generally commences with a
throttling attack. Procedure is, however, various, these gentlemen being
possessed of much ingenuity in the way of torture. “The cat” has within
the past year or so done much to modify this offensive state of things,
but the sympathetic appeals of certain tenderhearted M.P.’s and other
philanthropists, who are not themselves likely to be garrotted, on
behalf of the garrotters, will probably before long result in a
withdrawal of the _lex talionis_, and a natural resumption of the
garrotte system, with new adornments.

~Garrotting~, a mode of cheating practised amongst card-sharpers, by
concealing certain cards at the back of the neck.

~Gas~, to give off superfluous conceit, to bounce or brag; “his game is
GAS.” “To give a person GAS,” is to scold him or give him a good
beating. Synonymous with “to give him Jessie.”

~Gassy~, or GASEOUS, liable to “flare up” at any offence.

~Gate~, THE, Billingsgate. Sometimes Newgate, according to the
occupation and condition of the speaker. In the same way Paternoster Row
is by publishers known as “the Row.”

~Gate~, to order an undergrad not to pass beyond the college GATE. As a
rule, the GATE begins after hall, but in extreme cases the offender is
GATED for the whole day.—_University._

~Gate-race~, among pedestrians a mock race, got up not so much for the
best runner to win, as for the money taken from spectators, at the gate.
This sort of business is not peculiar to pedestrians; there are such
things as gate-money meetings at horse-racing.

~Gatter~, beer; “shant of GATTER,” a pot of beer. A curious slang street
melody, known in Seven Dials as _Bet the Coaley’s Daughter_, thus
mentions the word in a favourite verse:—

    “But when I strove my flame to tell,
      Says she, ‘Come, stow that patter,
    If you’re a cove wot likes a gal,
      Vy don’t you stand some GATTER?’
    In course I instantly complied—
      Two brimming quarts of porter,
    With sev’ral goes of gin beside,
      Drain’d Bet the Coaley’s daughter.”

~Gaudy~, the annual dinner of the Fellows of a College, in memory of
founders and benefactors. From GAUDEAMUS.—_Oxford University._

~Gawfs~, cheap red-skinned apples, a favourite fruit with costermongers,
who rub them well with a piece of cloth, and find ready purchasers.

~Gawky~, a lanky, or awkward person; a fool. _Saxon_, GEAK; _Scotch_,
GOWK.

~Gay~, loose, dissipated; “GAY woman,” a kept mistress or prostitute.
Many people will remember Leech’s celebrated caricature of two wretched
females on an equally wretched night, and the question asked by one
woman of the other, “How long have you been GAY?”

~Gay tyke boy~, a dog-fancier.

~Gee~, to agree with, or be congenial to a person.

~Geeloot~, or GALOOT, a recruit, or awkward soldier. A clumsy person,
also a term of contempt in America.

~Gen~, a shilling. _See_ back-slang article.

~Gent~, a contraction of “gentleman,”—in more senses than one. A
dressy, showy, foppish man, with a little mind, who vulgarizes the
prevailing fashion.

~Gent~, silver. From the _French_, ARGENT.

~Gentleman of four outs;~ in Ireland when a vulgar, blustering fellow
asserts that he is a gentleman, the retort generally is, “Yes, a
GENTLEMAN OF FOUR OUTS”—that is, without wit, without money, without
credit, and without manners.

~Gentleman of three ins~,—that is, in debt, in danger, and in poverty.

~Geordie~, general term in Northumberland and Durham for a pitman, or
coal-miner. From the _Greek_, GEORGE meaning one who works the earth,
originally a cultivator; the term has been in use more than a century.

~German Duck~, a sheep’s-head stewed with onions; a favourite dish among
the German sugar-bakers in the East-end of London.

~German Ducks~, bugs.—_Yorkshire._

~Get up~, a person’s appearance or general arrangements. Probably
derived from the decorations of a play.

    “There’s so much GETTING UP to please the town,
    It takes a precious deal of coming down.”

        _Planché’s Mr. Buckstone’s Ascent of Parnassus._

~Ghost~, “the GHOST doesn’t walk,” a theatrical term which implies that
there is no money about, and that there will be no “treasury.”

~Gibberish~, unmeaning jargon; the language of the gipsies, synonymous
with SLANG, another Gipsy word. Somner says, “_French_, GABBER; _Dutch_,
GABBEREN; and our own GAB, GABBER; hence also, I take it, our GIBBERISH,
a kind of canting language used by a sort of rogues we vulgarly call
gipsies, a gibble-gabble understood only among themselves.” _See
Introduction._ The GIBBERISH of schoolboys is formed by placing a
consonant between each syllable of a word, and is called the GIBBERISH
of the letter inserted. Thus, if F were the letter, it would be termed
the F GIBBERISH; if L, the L GIBBERISH—as in the sentence, “How do you
do?—_Howl dol youl dol?_” A GIBBERISH is sometimes formed by adding
_vis_ to each word, in which the previous sentence would be—“_Howvis
dovis youvis dovis?_” These things are worthy of schoolboys, as they are
in ability far below the rhyming, the back, or the centre slang, each of
which is constructed by people possessing no claim to literary
excellence whatever. Schoolboys in France form a GIBBERISH, in a
somewhat similar manner, by elongating their words two syllables, in the
first of which an _r_, in the second a _g_, predominates. Thus the words
_vous êtes un fou_ are spoken, _vousdregue esdregue undregue foudregue_.
Fast persons in Paris, of both sexes, frequently adopt terminations of
this kind, from some popular song, actor, exhibition, or political
event. In 1830, the favourite termination was _mar_, saying _épicemar_
for épicier, _cafémar_ for café. In 1823, when the diorama created a
sensation in Paris, the people spoke in _rama_ (_on parlait en rama_.)
In Balzac’s beautiful tale, _Le Père Goriot_, the young painter at the
boarding-house dinner-table mystifies the landlady by saying, “What a
beautiful _soupeaurama_!” To which the old woman replies, to the great
laughter of the company, “I beg your pardon, sir, it is _une soupe à
choux_.” These adaptations can hardly be called slang, or we shall have
everybody making a slang of his own, and refusing to believe in any
one’s else—a sort of secondhand edition of the Tower of Babel.

~Gib-face~, a heavy, ugly face; GIB is properly the lower lip of a
horse; “to hang one’s GIB,” to pout the lower lip, to be angry or
sullen.

~Gibus~, an opera hat. From the inventor of the crush hat.

~Giffle-gaffle~, or GIBBLE-GABBLE, nonsense. _See_ CHAFF. _Icelandic_,
GAFLA.

~Gig~, a farthing. Formerly GRIG.

~Gig~, fun, frolic, a spree. _Old French_, GIGUE, a jig, a romp.

    “In search of lark, or some delicious GIG,
    The mind delights on, when ’tis in prime twig.”

        _Randall’s Diary_, 1820.

    “‘No heirs have I,’ said mournful Matt;
      But Tom, still fond of GIG,
    Cried out, ‘No hairs? don’t fret at that,
      When you can buy a wig.’”

~Gig lamps~, spectacles; also a person who wears spectacles is often
called GIG-LAMPS. Connexion obvious. This term has been in use probably
as long as GIG-LAMPS themselves—if GIG-LAMPS were invented after
spectacles.

~Gill~, or JILL, a homely woman; “Jack and Gill,” &c.

~Gills~, the lower part of the face.—_Bacon._ “To grease one’s GILLS,”
“to have a good feed,” or make a hearty meal. A man suffering from the
effects of a previous night’s debauch, is said to “look queer about the
gills.”

~Gills~, overlarge shirt collars.

~Gilt~, money. _German_, GELD; _Dutch_, GELT.

~Gimcrack~, a bijou, a slim piece of mechanism. Old slang for “a spruce
wench.”—_New Bailey._ Any things which are gaudy and easily breakable,
are known now as GIMCRACKS.

~Ginger~, a showy, fast horse—as if he had been figged with GINGER
under his tail; a red-haired man. Term commonly used in depreciation of
a person’s appearance.

~Ginger hackled~, having flaxen, light yellow hair. Term originally used
to describe a certain colour or colours in game-cocks.—_See_ HACKLE.

~Gingerly~, to do anything with great care.—_Cotgrave._

~Gingham~, an umbrella. Term very common in London.

~Gingumbob~, a bauble.

~Gin-spinner~, a distiller, or rectifier of gin.

~Give~, to strike, to scold; “I’ll GIVE it to you,” _i.e._, I will
thrash you. To lead to, in the sense of directions. Thus, in one of the
Christmas numbers of _All the Year Round_ we are told that “a side
portal and a passage, dark at noon, GAVE upon Paradise Alley.” This
usage of the word, from the French idiomatic use of _donner_, is
becoming by no means uncommon.

~Give in~, to admit oneself defeated, to “throw up the sponge,” or
“strike one’s flag.”

~Give it mouth~, a rude request to an actor or orator, which means,
speak up. Low folk can fancy nothing higher in the way of encomium on an
actor than, “He’s the cove to GIVE IT MOUTH—rather!”

~Gladstone~, cheap claret. GLADSTONE reduced the duty on French wines.

~Glasgow magistrate~, a salt herring. When George IV. visited Scotland,
a wag placed some salt herrings on the iron guard of the carriage
belonging to a well-known GLASGOW MAGISTRATE, who made one of a
deputation to receive his Majesty.

~Glaze~, glass; generally applied to windows. To “star the GLAZE” is to
break a window.

~Glib~, a tongue; “slacken your GLIB,” _i.e._, “loosen your tongue.”

~Glim~, a light, a lamp; “dowse the GLIM,” put out the candle. _Sea and
Old Cant._ GLIMS, spectacles. _Gaelic_, GLINN, light. _German_
(provincial), GLIMM, a spark.

~Glim lurk~, a begging paper, giving a circumstantial account of a
dreadful fire—which never happened.

~Gloak~, a man. Term much used in old thieves’ cant.

~Glum~, sulky, stem; “to look GLUM,” to appear annoyed or disconcerted.

~Glump~, to sulk.

~Glumpish~, of a stubborn, sulky temper.

~Go~, a GO of gin, a quartern of that liquor. (This word, as applied to
a measure of liquor, is stated to have arisen from the following
circumstance:—Two well-known actors once met at the bar of a tavern to
have a “wet” together. “One more glass and then we’ll GO,” was repeated
so often on either hand, that in the end GO was out of the question with
both of them, and so the word passed into a saying.) GO is also
synonymous with circumstance or occurrence; “a rummy GO,” and “a great
GO,” signify curious and remarkable occurrences; “all the GO,” when
anything creates unusual interest, “no GO,” no good; “here’s a pretty
GO!” here’s a trouble; GO, a term in the game of cribbage; “to GO the
jump,” to enter a house by the window.—_See_ LITTLE GO; also
CALL-A-GO.

    “Gemmen (says he), you all well know
    The joy there is whene’er we meet;
    It’s what I call the primest GO,
    And rightly named, ’tis—‘quite a treat,’”

        _Jack Randall’s Diary_, 1820.

~Go along~, a fool, a cully, one of the most contemptuous terms in a
thieves’ vocabulary.

~Gob~ or GOBBET, a portion. Generally applied to meat by schoolboys.

~Gob~, the mouth, as in pugilistic slang “a spank on the GOB, drawing
the gravy.” Also mucus, or saliva. Sometimes used for GAB, talk—

    “There was a man called Job,
      Dwelt in the land of Uz;
    He had a good gift of the GOB;
      The same case happen us.”

        ZACH. BOYD.

_Gaelic_—GAB and GOB, a mouth. _See_ GAB.

~God bless the Duke Of Argyle!~ a Scottish insinuation made when one
shrugs his shoulders, of its being caused by parasites or cutaneous
affections.—_See_ SCOTCH FIDDLE, SCOTCH GREYS. It is said to have been
originally the thankful exclamation of the Glasgow folk, at finding a
certain row of iron posts, erected by his grace in that city to mark the
division of his property, very convenient to rub against. Some say the
posts were put up purposely for the benefit of the good folk of Glasgow,
who were at the time suffering from the “Scotch fiddle.” This is,
however, but a Southern scandal.

~Gods~, the people in the upper gallery of a theatre; “up amongst the
GODS,” a seat amongst the persons in the gallery—so named from the high
position of that part, and the blue sky generally painted on the ceiling
of the theatre; termed by the French, “paradis.”

~Gods~, the quadrats used by printers in throwing on the imposing stone,
similar to the movement in casting dice.—_Printers’ term._

~Go due north~, to become bankrupt, to go to Whitecross Street.—_Nearly
obsolete._

~Go for the gloves~, to lay against a horse on the chance of its losing,
without having the wherewithal to pay if it wins. Probably from the
custom of ladies who bet GLOVES, and expect, as the racing men say, to
“stand them to nothing,” _i.e._, to be paid if they win, but not to pay
if they lose. This is a last resource of the bankrupt turfite;
and the big handicaps at the end of the year, the Cesarewitch and
Cambridgeshire, offer both temptation and opportunity to those who can
only hope to recoup themselves for their previous losses by “GLOVING IT”
successfully. When, in the sporting papers it is stated that a settling
at Tattersall’s was more than usually unsatisfactory, it may be fairly
assumed that the GLOVES have not been won by those who most desired
them.

~Go in~, to enter for, to apply oneself in pursuit of. Men at the
Universities are said to GO IN for honours, aquatics, or whatever their
chief desire or employment may be. The expression is now general.

~Go it~, a term of encouragement, implying, “keep it up!” Sometimes
amplified to “GO IT, ye cripples;” said to have been a facetious
rendering of the last line of Virgil’s _Eclogues_—

    “Ite domum saturæ, venit Hesperus, _ite capellæ_;”

or, “GO IT, ye cripples, crutches are cheap.”

~Goldbacked uns~, body lice. Sometimes called greybacked uns.

~Goldfinches~, sovereigns. Similar to Canaries.

~Gold-mine~, any profitable investment, from a fried-fish shop to a
remunerative speculation involving millions.

~Golgotha~, a hat, “place of a skull.” Hence the “Don’s gallery,” at St.
Mary’s, Cambridge, and that part of the theatre at Oxford where the
heads of houses sit.

~Gol-mol~, noise, commotion.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Golopshus~, splendid, delicious, luscious.—_Norwich._

~Gonnof~, an expert thief, a master of his craft; one of the greatest
compliments a London pickpocket can pay another is to say, “he’s a
reglar GONNOF.”—_See_ GUN. The word GONNOF is very old. During Kett’s
rebellion in Norfolk, in the reign of Edward VI., a song was sung by the
insurgents in which the term occurs—

    “The country GNOFFES, Hob, Dick, and Hick,
      With clubbes and clouted shoon,
    Shall fill up Dussyn dale
      With slaughter’d bodies soone.”

~Good people~, the name given by country folk, evidently from fear of
offending by any less decided term, to fairies, brownies, pixies, &c.
Mothers often say to querulous children, “I wish the GOOD PEOPLE would
run away with you.”

~Goods~, in the sporting world, men or horses. A horse or man of
exceptionable quality is called “good GOODS,” and a backer will speak of
either as being in his opinion “best GOODS,” as compared with others in
the race.

~Good time~, an expressive phrase, which means all earthly bliss to the
American mind. The finest reminiscence a Yankee can have is that of a
GOOD TIME, wherever it may have been spent. No moderate amount of
happiness is ever recorded in the register which denotes how often its
possessor has “had a GOOD TIME.”

~Good woman~, a not uncommon public-house sign, representing a woman
without a head,—the ungallant allusion is that she cannot scold. Maybe,
the publican does not think that it means also that she cannot drink.
The Honest Lawyer, another sign, is depicted in the same manner.

~Goose~, a tailor’s pressing iron. Originally a slang term, but now in
most dictionaries.

~Goose;~ “Paddy’s GOOSE,” _i.e._, the White Swan, a celebrated
public-house in Ratcliff Highway.

~Goose~, “to cook his GOOSE,” to kill him; the same as “to give him his
gruel,” or “settle his hash.”

~Goose~, “to get the GOOSE,” “to be GOOSED,” signifies to be hissed
while on the stage. The big-bird, the terror of actors. _See_ BIG
BIRD.—_Theatrical._

~Goose~, to ruin, or spoil; to hiss a play.—_Theatrical._ To be “sound
on the GOOSE” is in America to be orthodox in one’s political creed.

~Gooseberry~, to “play up old GOOSEBERRY” with any one, to defeat or
silence a person in a quick or summary manner.

~Gooseberry-pickers~, sharp children, who are ostensibly placed in
charge of their elder sisters, when the latter go out shopping, but who
are in reality a check on any chance of flirtation.

~Goosecap~, a simpleton, a booby, or noodle.—_Devonshire._

~Gooser~, a settler, or finishing blow.

~Go over~, in clerical slang, signifies to join the Church of Rome.

~Gorge~, to eat in a ravenous manner. “Rotten GORGERS” are those hungry
lads who hang about Covent Garden Market, and devour the discarded
fruit.

~Gorger~, a swell, a well-dressed, or gorgeous man—probably derived
from the latter adjective. Sometimes used to denote an employer, or
principal, as the manager of a theatre.

~Gormed~, a Norfolk corruption of a profane oath. So used by Mr.
Peggotty in _David Copperfield_.

~Gospel grinder~, a City missionary, or tract-distributor.

~Gospel Shop~, an irreverent term for a church or chapel of any
denomination. Mostly in use among sailors.

~Goss~, a hat—from the gossamer silk of which modern hats are made.

~Goss~, “to give a man GOSS,” to requite an injury, to beat, or kill.
This is an Americanism, and is applied variously. A steamboat captain on
the Mississippi, determined to pass his rival, called out, so the story
goes, to the fireman, “Give her GOSS and let her rip, as I mean to pass
that boat, or bust.”

~Goth~, an uncultivated person. One who is ignorant of the ways of
society.

~Go the whole pile~, to put all one’s bank on a solitary chance. An
Americanism which had its origin in the PILES of gold dust used as
circulating medium by gambling miners.

~Gourock ham~, a salt herring. GOUROCK, on the Clyde, about twenty-five
miles from Glasgow, was formerly a great fishing village.—_Scotch._

~Government sign-post~, the gallows. This is necessarily almost
obsolete.

~Governor~, a father, a master or superior person, an elder; “which way,
GUV’NER, to Cheapside?”

~Gowler~, a dog.—_North Country Cant._ _Query_, GROWLER.

~Gownsman~, a student at one of the universities, as distinguished from
a TOWNSMAN.

~Grab~, to clutch, or seize; GRABBED, caught, apprehended.

~Grace-card~, the six of hearts, so termed in Ireland. A Kilkenny
gentleman, named GRACE, being solicited, with promises of royal favour,
to espouse the cause of William III., gave the following answer, written
on the back of the six of hearts, to an emissary of Marshal Schomberg’s,
who had been commissioned to make the proposal to him:—“Tell your
master I despise his offer; and that honour and conscience are dearer to
a gentleman than all the wealth and titles a prince can bestow.” This
would have been a much better story had James II. been a better King,
and had he not earned for himself, even among Catholic Irishmen, a
disgraceful name, through his craven conduct at the Battle of the Boyne.

~Graft~, work; “where are you GRAFTING?” _i.e._, where do you work?
“What GRAFT are you at?” what are you doing? Perhaps derived from
gardening phraseology; or a variation of _craft_.

~Granny~, a knot which will not hold, from its being wrongly and
clumsily tied.—_Sea._

~Granny~, to know, or recognise; “do ye GRANNY the bloke?” do you know
the man?

~Grappling irons~, fingers.—_Sea._

~Grass~, “gone to GRASS,” dead,—a coarse allusion to burial; absconded,
or disappeared suddenly; also, gone to waste; it is said of wasted limbs
that they have “gone to GRASS;” “oh, go to GRASS,” a common answer to a
troublesome or inquisitive person,—possibly a corruption of “go to
GRACE,” meaning, of course, a directly opposite fate.

~Grass~, to knock down. Also to throw in a wrestling-match. “He GRASSED
his man with a heavy righthander,” or “He brought his man to GRASS by
means of a swinging hipe.”

~Grass-comber~, a country fellow, a haymaker.

~Grasshopper~, a waiter at a tea-garden.

~Grass widow~, an unmarried mother; a deserted mistress. In the United
States, during the gold fever in California, it was common for an
adventurer to put both his wife (termed in his absence a GRASS-WIDOW)
and his children to school during his absence. Also a married woman,
resident in England, whose husband is in India or the colonies.

~Gravel~, to confound, to bother; “I’m GRAVELLED,” _i.e._, perplexed or
confused.—_Old._ Also, to prostrate, to beat to the ground.

~Gravel-rash~, a scratched face,—telling its tale of a drunken fall. A
person subject to this is called a GRAVEL-GRINDER.

~Gravesend sweetmeats~, shrimps. GRAVESEND TWINS are solid particles of
sewage.

~Gray~, a halfpenny, with either two “heads” or two “tails”—both sides
alike. They are used for cheating the unwary at “Tommy Dodd,” or pitch
and toss. They are often “rung in” with a victim’s own money, so that
the caller of “heads” or “tails” cannot lose. Thus if A has to call, he
or a confederate manages to mix the selected GRAYS with B’s tossing
halfpence. There are various and almost obvious uses for them.

~Gray-coat parson~, a lay impropriator, or lessee of great tithes.

~Gray mare~, a wife who “wears the breeches.” From an old story in which
the point is to show that the “GRAY MARE,” the wife’s choice, “is the
better horse,” and by parity of reasoning that the wife is superior to
the husband.

~Grays~, or SCOTCH GRAYS, lice. These pretty little things are called by
many names, among others by those of GRAY-BACKS, and GOLD-BACKED UNS,
which are popular among those who have most interest in the matter.

~Grease spot~, a minute remnant, humorously the only distinguishable
remains of an antagonist after a terrific contest.

~Greasing~, bribing. Sometimes called “GREASING the palm” of a man’s
hand.

~Grecian bend~, modern milliner slang for an exaggerated bustle, the
effect of which is generally assisted by unnaturally high-heeled boots.

~Greek~, a wide-awake fellow, a sharper.

~Greek kalends~, an expression signifying an indefinite period; never.
Term used in making promises never intended to be carried out. The
Greeks had no KALENDS.

~Greeks~, the low Irish. St. Giles’s GREEK, slang or cant language.
Cotgrave gives merrie GREEK as a definition for a roystering fellow, a
drunkard. The GREEKS have always been regarded as a jolly, luxurious
race; so much so, that the Latins employed the verb _Græcari_ (lit. to
play the GREEK) to designate fine living and free potations, a sense in
which Horace frequently uses it; while Shakspeare often mentions the
merry GREEKS; and “as merry as a grig” (or GREEK) was long a favourite
allusion in old English authors. It is said by some that grig is in this
sense intended to represent the small eel of that name which from its
lively movements is supposed to be always merry; while others incline to
the belief that the cricket, which is also in some parts of the
provinces known as a grig, is meant. Readers may take their choice.

~Green~, ignorant, not wide-awake, inexperienced.—_Shakspeare._ “Do you
see any GREEN in my eye?” ironical question in a dispute.

~Greenbacks~, the paper money issued in the United States during the
war. The term was at first applied only to the notes for small amounts,
which were backed with green, but eventually the one word represented
all descriptions of what is now known in America as “currency.”

~Green-horn~, a fresh, simple, or uninitiated person.

~Greenlander~, an inexperienced person, a spoon. Sometimes an Irishman.

~Greenwich goose~, a pensioner of the Naval Hospital.

~Griddler~, a person who sings in the streets without a printed copy of
the words.—_Seven Dials._

~Gridiron~, a County Court summons. Originally a summons to the Court of
Westminster only; from the GRIDIRON arms. The Grafton Club is nearly
always known as the GRID or GRIDIRON, that instrument being brought into
requisition whenever possible in the cuisine.

~Gridiron and dough boys~, the flag of the United States, in allusion to
the stars and stripes.—_Sea._

~Grief~, “to come to GRIEF,” to meet with an accident, to be ruined.

~Griffin~, in India, a newly-arrived cadet; general for an inexperienced
youngster.

~Grind~, “to take a GRIND,” _i.e._, a walk, or constitutional. The daily
grind is a term representing employment containing much routine. At
Oxford college sports are called sometimes the GRIND.

~Grind~, to work up for an examination, to cram by oneself, or with a
private tutor.

~Grinder~, private tutor, a coach.—_University._

~Grinder~, a tooth.

~Grindoff~, a miller. From _The Miller and his Men_.

~Gripes~, the stomach-ache. _See_ TRIPES.

~Grist to the mill~, money to the pocket, food to the family; anything
which is supposed to add to a man’s immediate prospects, to his income,
or to his benefit in any way, is said to “bring GRIST TO THE MILL.”

~Grizzle~, to fret or cry continuously.

~Grog blossoms~, pimples on the face, caused by hard drinking. Of such a
person it is often said, “He bears his blushing honours thick upon him.”

~Grog-fight~, a drinking party.—_Military._

~Groggy~, tipsy; when a prize-fighter becomes “weak on his pins,” and
nearly beaten, he is said to be GROGGY. The same term is applied to
horses that are overworked and unsteady. From similarity of appearance
to the peculiarity of gait consequent on imbibing too much GROG.

~Grove of the Evangelist~, a facetious name for St. John’s Wood.

~Growler~, a four-wheeled cab. It is generally supposed that drivers of
these vehicles take a less favourable view of life than do their Hansom
brethren.

~Grub and bub~, victuals and drink of any kind,—GRUB signifying food,
and BUB, drink.

~Grubbing ken~, or SPINIKIN, a workhouse; a cook-shop.

~Grubby~, musty, or old-fashioned.—_Devonshire._

~Gruel~, “to give a person his GRUEL,” to kill him. An expression in all
probability derived from the report of a trial for poisoning, or from
the easiest manner of administering a dose of poison. In the old days a
similar phrase was “to drug a posset.” Compare “to settle his hash,” and
“cook his goose.”

~Guardevine~, a cellaret.—_Scotch._

~Guinea pigs~, habitual directors of public companies; special jurymen;
and engineer officers doing civil duty at the War Office, and paid a
GUINEA per diem.

~Guinea to a goose~, a sporting phrase, meaning long odds in favour of,
or against, anything under notice. In the City this state of things is
represented by the phrase, Lombard Street to a China orange. There are
also other colloquialisms on this subject, but their power is, as a
rule, mainly dependent upon their indecency.

~Gulfed~, originally a Cambridge term, denoting that a man is unable
to enter for the classical examination from having failed in the
mathematical. These men’s names appeared in the list of “Degrees
Allowed.” The name GULF for this list is said to have arisen from the
boast of a former “wooden spoon.” “I would have you to know there is a
great GULF between _me_ and the captain of the poll.” Candidates for
classical honours were compelled to go in for both examinations. From
the alteration of the arrangements, the term as thus applied is now
obsolete. The expression is common now in Oxford as descriptive of a man
who goes in for honours, and only gets a pass. An Honorary Fourth is
when a candidate who only tries for a pass does so well that he is
raised to the honours’ list.

~Gull~, to cheat, to deceive; also one easily cheated. From the easy
manner in which the bird of that name is deceived.

~Gullyfluff~, the waste—coagulated dust, crumbs, and hair—which
accumulates imperceptibly in the pockets of schoolboys.

~Gully rakers~, cattle thieves in Australia, the cattle being stolen out
of almost inaccessible valleys, there termed GULLIES.

~Gulpin~, a weak, credulous fellow, who will GULP down anything.

~Gummy~, thick, fat—generally applied to a woman’s ankles, or to a man
whose flabby person betokens him a drunkard.

~Gumption~, or RUMGUMPTION, comprehension, capacity. From GAUM, to
comprehend; “I canna gauge it, and I canna GAUM it,” as a Yorkshire
exciseman said of a hedgehog.

~Gun~, a magsman or street thief. Diminutive of gonnuf or gunnof. A
GUN’S practice is known as GUNOVING.

~Gunner’s daughter~, a term facetiously applied to the method of
punishing boys in the Royal Navy by tying them securely to the breech of
a cannon, so as to present the proper part convenient for the cat, and
flogging them. This is called “marrying” or “kissing” the GUNNER’S
DAUGHTER.

~Gup~, gossip.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Gurrawaun~, a coachman, a native Indian corruption of the English word
coachman. For another curious corruption of a similar kind, _see_
SIMPKIN.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Gusher~, one overflowing with sentiment, a rhapsodizer. Romance-reading
young ladies are generally described as GUSHING, and of late years the
word GUSH has done duty as representing the newspaper work necessary for
a continuance of the “largest circulation.”

~Gut scraper~, a fiddler.

~Gutter blood~, a low or vulgar man.—_Scotch._

~Gutter lane~, the throat. Probably from GUTTUR.

~Guttle~, _see_ GUZZLE.

~Guy~, a fright, a dowdy, an ill-dressed person. Derived from the effigy
of Guy Fawkes carried about by boys on Nov. 5. “Hollo, boys, another
GUY!”

~Guy~, to get away. Same as HEDGE in street phraseology, which _see_.

~Guzzle~, to eat or drink to excess; to eat loudly, hastily, and
clumsily.

~Gyp~, an undergraduate’s servant at Cambridge. Popularly derived by
Cantabs from the _Greek_, GYPS, (γύψ), a vulture, from the dishonest
rapacity peculiar to GYPS. At Oxford servants are called scouts.

~Hackle~, pluck; “to show HACKLE,” to be willing to fight. HACKLES are
the long feathers on the back of a cock’s neck, which he erects when
angry,—hence the metaphor.

~Hackslaver~, to stammer in one’s speech, like a dunce at his lesson.

~Haddock~, a purse.—_See_ BEANS.

~Hair of the dog~, a “modest quencher,” taken the morning following a
debauch. Originally a “HAIR OF THE DOG that bit you.” This is very old,
and seems to show that homœopathy is by no means new, so far as topers,
at all events, are concerned.

~Half-a-bean~, half-a-sovereign.

~Half-a-bull~, two shillings and sixpence.

~Half-a-couter~, half-a-sovereign.

~Half-a-hog~, sixpence; sometimes termed HALF-A-GRUNTER.

~Half-and-half~, a mixture of ale and porter, much affected by medical
students; occasionally Latinized into “dimidium dimidiumque.” Cooper is
HALF-AND-HALF, made of stout and porter. The term of HALF-AND-HALF is
also applied to the issue of marriages between gipsies and “white
people.”

~Half-a-stretch~, six months in prison.

~Half-a-tusheroon~, half-a-crown.

~Half-baked~, soft, doughy, half-witted, silly. HALF-ROCKED has a
similar meaning.

~Half-foolish~, ridiculous; means often wholly foolish.

~Half Jack.~ _See_ JACKS.

~Half-mourning~, to have a black eye from a blow. As distinguished from
“whole-mourning,” two black eyes.

~Half-rocked~, silly, half-witted. Derived from a vulgar idea that in
the Westcountry children are nursed in a peculiar manner, which in
afterlife affects their wits. They are said to be nursed bottom upwards,
so as to sleep without much rocking. If this is inconsequent it is the
fault of the saying and not of the dictionary. Compare HALF-BAKED.

~Half-seas-over~, reeling drunk.—_Sea._ Used by Swift.

~Hall~, THE, Leadenhall Market, among folk who get their livings there,
in the same way as “The Garden” refers to Covent Garden.

~Hand~, a workman or helper, a person. “A cool HAND,” explained by Sir
Thomas Overbury to be “one who accounts bashfulness the wickedest thing
in the world, and therefore studies impudence.”

~Hander~, a second, or assistant. At some schools blows on the hand
administered with a cane are so called.

~Handicap~, an arrangement by which, in any description of sport, every
competitor in a race is supposed to have a chance of winning equal to
the chances of his opponents. HANDICAPPING, in horse-racing signifies
the adjudgment of various weights to horses differing in age, power, and
speed, so as to place them as much as possible on an equality. At other
sports this equalization is managed by means of starts.

The old game of HANDICAP (hand i’ the cap) is a very different affair;
and, as it is now almost obsolete, being only played by gentlemen in
Ireland, after hunting and racing dinners, when the wine has circulated
pretty freely, merits a description here. It is played by three persons,
in the following manner:—A wishes to obtain some article belonging to
B, say a horse; and offers to “challenge” his watch against it. B
agrees; and C is chosen as HANDICAPPER to “make the award”—that is, to
name the sum of money that the owner of the article of lesser value
shall give with it, in exchange for the more valuable one. The three
parties, A, B, and C, put down a certain stake each, and then the
HANDICAPPER makes his award. If A and B are both satisfied with the
award, the exchange is made between the horse and watch, and the
HANDICAPPER wins, and takes up the stakes. Or if neither be satisfied
with the award, the HANDICAPPER takes the stakes; but if A be satisfied
and B not, or _vice versâ_, the party who declares himself satisfied
gets the stakes. It is consequently the object of the HANDICAPPER to
make such award as will cause the challenger and challenged to be of the
same mind; and considerable ingenuity is required and exhibited on his
part. The challenge having been made, as stated, between A’s watch and
B’s horse, each party puts his HAND into a CAP or hat [or into his
pocket] while C makes the award, which he purposely does in as rapid and
complex a manner as possible. Thus, after humorously exaggerating the
various excellences of the articles, he may say—“The owner of the
superior gold lever watch shall give to the owner of the beautiful
thoroughbred bay horse, called Flyaway, the watch and fifteen
half-crowns, seven crowns, eighteen half-guineas, one hundred and forty
groats, thirteen sovereigns, fifty-nine pence, seventeen shillings and
sixty-three farthings. Draw, gentlemen!” A and B must instantly then
draw out and open their hands. If money appears in both, they are
agreed, and the award stands good; if money be in neither hand, they are
also agreed, but the award is rejected. If money be only in one hand,
they are not agreed, the award is off, and the stakes go as already
stated. Very frequently, neither A nor B is sufficiently quick in his
mental calculation to follow the HANDICAPPER, and not knowing on the
instant the total of the various sums in the award, prefers being “off,”
and, therefore, “draws” no money. As in this event the HANDICAPPER gets
the stakes, the reason for the complex nature of his award is obvious.

When HANDICAPPING has once commenced in a convivial party, it is
considered unsportsmanlike to refuse a challenge. So when the small
hours draw on, and the fun becomes fast and furious, coats, boots,
waistcoats, even shirts are challenged, HANDICAPPED, and exchanged,
amidst an almost indescribable scene of good humoured joviality and
stentorian laughter. This is the true HANDICAP. The application of the
term to horse-racing has arisen from one or more persons being chosen to
make the award between persons, who put down equal sums of money, on
entering horses unequal in power and speed for the same race. So that
the HANDICAP has ultimately come to be regarded as an arrangement of a
purely business-like nature, by which means affairs, no matter how much
they may differ in degree, may be arranged satisfactorily by all
parties. The use of the word is spreading rapidly, and it has already a
sense beyond that of mere sporting.

~Handicap~, to make even, as a Roland for an Oliver. Not long since in a
pedestrian enclosure, a pugilist who had been specially retained on one
side struck a member of the other party, who not being a fighting-man
received the blow with apparent contentment. The injured person had,
however, determined on being revenged, and about an hour afterwards he
knocked the professional down with a big stick, using the words at the
same time, “that HANDICAPS us” (that makes us even). The word is often
used thus also: A man finding himself inferior to another at fisticuffs
will, seizing a weapon, exclaim, “I’ll HANDICAP you,” _i.e._, I’ll bring
you to my level (or “level myself up”) with this.

~Handle~, a nose; the title appended to a person’s name; also a term in
boxing, “to HANDLE one’s fists,” to use them against an adversary.

~Handling~, a method of concealing certain cards in the palm of the
hand, or in fashionable long wristbands; one of the many modes of
cheating practised by sharpers.

~Hand-me-downs~, second-hand clothes. _See_ REACH-ME-DOWNS.

~Hand-saw~, or CHIVE FENCER, a man who sells razors and knives in the
streets.

~Handseller~, or CHEAP JACK, a street or open-air seller, a man who
carries goods to his customers, instead of waiting for his customers to
visit him.

~Hanging~, in difficulties. A man who is in great straits, and who is,
therefore, prepared to do anything desperate to retrieve his fortunes,
is said, among sporting men, to be “a man HANGING,” _i.e._, a man to
whom any change must be for the better.

~Hangman’s wages~, thirteenpence halfpenny.—_Old. 17th century._

    “’Sfoot, what a witty rogue was this to leave this fair
    thirteenpence halfpenny, and this old halter,” intimating aptly—

    “Had the hangman met us there, by these presages
    Here had been his work, and here his wages.”

        _Match at Midnight._

The clothes of the culprit were also the hangman’s wages. See one of
Lord Bacon’s aphorisms, beginning “A cursed page.”

~Hang out~, to reside,—in allusion to the ancient custom of hanging out
signs.

~Hang up~, to rob with violence, to garrotte. Most likely from
throttling associations in connexion with the practice of garrotting.

~Hannah~, “that’s the man as married HANNAH,” a Salopian phrase to
express a matter begun or ended satisfactorily. Meaning actually,
“that’s the thing.”

~Hansel~, or HANDSEL, the lucky money, or first money taken in the
morning by a pedlar.—_Cocker’s Dictionary_, 1724. “Legs of mutton
(street term for sheep’s trotters, or feet) two for a penny; who’ll give
me a HANSEL? who’ll give me a HANSEL?” Hence, earnest money,
first-fruits, &c. In Norfolk, HANSELLING a thing is using it for the
first time, as wearing a new coat, taking seisin of it, as it were.
Danish, HANDSEL; _Anglo-Saxon_, HANDSELEN.

~Ha’porth o’ coppers~, Habeas Corpus.—_Legal slang._

~Ha’porth o’ liveliness~, the music at a low concert, or theatre. Also a
dilatory person.

~Happy-go-lucky~, careless, indifferent as to the favours or reverses of
fortune.

~Haramzadeh~, a very general Indian term of contempt, signifying
base-born.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Hard lines~, hardship, difficulty. Soldiers’ term for hard duty on the
lines in front of the enemy. LINES was formerly synonymous with _Lot_,
_see_ Ps. xvi. 6.—_Bible version_—“The LINES are fallen unto me in
pleasant places;” _Prayer-Book do._—“The LOT is fallen unto me in a
fair ground.”

~Hard mouthed un~, any one difficult to deal with, a sharp bargainer, an
obstinate person. Derivation obvious.

~Hard tack~, ship biscuits. This is a term used by sailors to
distinguish their ordinary sea-bread from that obtained on shore, which
is called soft TACK, or soft tommy. HARD TACK is also a phrase used by
the London lower classes to signify coarse or insufficient food.

~Hard-up~, a cigar-end finder, who collects the refuse pieces of smoked
cigars from the gutter, and having dried them, smokes them, or sells
them as tobacco to the very poor. _See_ TOPPER.

~Hard-up~, in distress, poverty-stricken.—_Sea._

~Hardy~, a stone.—_North._

~Harebrained~, reckless, unthinking.

~Harry~, or OLD HARRY, (_i.e._, Old Hairy?) the Devil; “to play OLD
HARRY with one,” _i.e._, ruin or annoy him.

~Harry-soph~, (ἐρίσοφος, very wise indeed), a student of law or physic
at Cambridge who, being of the same standing as the students in arts in
his year, is allowed to wear a full-sleeved gown when they assume their
B.A. gowns, though he does not obtain his actual degree so soon. An
undergraduate in his last year is a Senior Soph, in his last term a
Questionist.

~Harum-scarum~, wild, dissipated, reckless; four horses driven in a
line. This is also called SUICIDE. _See_ TANDEM, RANDEM, UNICORN, &c.

~Hash~, a mess, confusion; “a pretty HASH he made of it;” to HASH UP, to
jumble together without order or regularity. The term also occurs in the
phrase “to settle his HASH,” which is equivalent to “give him his
gruel,” or “cook his goose,” _i.e._, to kill him.

~Hatchet~, “to throw the HATCHET,” to tell lies. Same as “to draw the
long bow.”

~Hatchet~, “to sling the HATCHET,” to skulk.—_Sea._

~Hawbuck~, a vulgar, ignorant, country fellow, but one remove from the
clodpole.

~Hawse holes~, the apertures in a ship’s bows through which the cables
pass; “he has crept in through the HAWSE-HOLES,” said of an officer who
has risen from the grade of an ordinary seaman, whose original position
in the vessel was forward—before the mast.—_Navy._

~Hay bag~, a woman.

~Haymarket Hectors~, bullies who, in the interest of prostitutes, affect
the neighbourhood of Leicester Square and the Haymarket.

~Haze~, to confuse and annoy a subordinate by contradictory,
unnecessary, and perplexing orders.

~Hazy~, intoxicated, also dull and stupid.

~Head-beetler~, the bully of the workshop, who lords it over his
fellow-workmen by reason of superior strength, skill in fighting, &c.
Sometimes applied to the foreman.

~Header~, a plunge head foremost into water, or a fall in the same
posture from accident. Nowadays a theatrical expression for any
supposedly daring jump of hero or heroine in sensational dramas.

~Head or tail~, “I can’t make HEAD OR TAIL of it,” _i.e._, cannot make
it out. Originally a gambling phrase.

~Head-rails~, the teeth.—_Sea._

~Head-serag~, a master, overseer, or other important personage; from
SERANG, a boatswain.—_Bengalee_, and _Sea_.

~Heap~, “a HEAP of people,” a crowd; “struck all of a HEAP,” suddenly
astonished.

~Heat~, a bout, or turn, in horse or foot racing. By means of heats the
field is gradually reduced.

~Heavy dragoons~, bugs, in contradistinction from fleas, which are
“light infantry.”—_Oxford University._

~Heavy wet~, malt liquor—because the more a man drinks of it, the
heavier and more stupid he becomes.

~Hedge~, to get away from any dangerous spot. “We saw the slop coming,
and HEDGED at once.”

~Hedge~, to secure oneself from loss over one bet by making others.
HEDGING, as a system of betting, is entirely dependent upon what happens
in the market after a horse has been backed. From information, or good
judgment, a backer selects, say, three horses, A, B, and C, whom he
thinks likely to advance in the betting, and takes 50 to 1—say £1000 to
£20—against each of them. As the race-day approaches the horse A may
fall out of the betting, from accident or other cause, and have to be
written off as a dead loss of £20. But the other two horses, as
anticipated, improve in public favour, and the backer, who now becomes a
HEDGER, succeeds in laying 5 to 1—say £500 to £100—against B, and 2 to
1—say 500 to £250—against C. The account then stands thus:—A is a
certain loss of £20; but if B wins, the HEDGER will receive £1000 and
pay £500; balance in favour, £500. If B loses, the HEDGER will receive
£100 and pay £20; balance in favour, £80. If C wins, the hedger will
receive £1000 and pay £500; balance in favour, £500. If C loses, the
HEDGER will receive £250 and pay £20; balance in favour, £230.
Deducting, then, the loss of £20 on A, the HEDGER’S winnings will be
considerable; and he cannot lose, providing his information or judgment
lead to the required result. It must be borne in mind that very often a
man who feels inclined to go in for a HEDGING speculation, may back half
a dozen horses, not one of which sees a short price or goes to the post;
besides which it must never be forgotten, that, however well turf
speculations may look on paper, they are subject to the contingency of
the bets being honourably paid on settling-day—the Monday after a
race—when unfortunately there are often more “receivers” than “payers”
at the clubs. However, turf transactions are among professionals
conducted at least as honourably as are any other business matters; and
it is only the fledgling swell, to whom the Legislature gives special
opportunities of losing his money, who is generally _non est_ when
paytime comes. “The Druid” in _Post and Paddock_ has remarked:—

    “The term HEDGING has been quite superseded by “laying off;” and we
    had, in fact, quite forgotten it till we saw it stated in the papers
    lately, by a clergyman, who did not answer a question on doctrine as
    the Bishop of Exeter exactly liked, that his lordship addressed him
    to this effect: ‘You are HEDGING, sir; you are HEDGING!’”

Usually correct as “The Druid” was, he seems to have fallen into an
error here, as HEDGING, and “laying off,” have been exchangeable terms,
as far as the oldest turfite can say. It should be remembered that
HEDGING is generally done with the man who has originally laid the odds;
for as a natural consequence, when the backer finds it convenient to
hedge, the layer finds it equally so to back the horse back,—the first
loss being considered always the best by bookmakers who _are_
bookmakers. Besides which, the layer has generally a lot of “dead
money”—money to the good over horses he has laid against, which have
since been struck out—and this he profitably expends in backing certain
horses back for the purpose of levelling up the book.

~Hedge-popping~, shooting small birds about the hedges, as boys do;
unsportsmanlike kind of shooting.

~Heel-tap~, the small quantity of wine or other beverage left in the
bottom of a glass, considered as a sign that the liquor is not liked,
and therefore unfriendly and unsocial to the host and the company. _See_
DAY-LIGHT.

~Heigh-ho!~ a cant term for stolen yarn, from the expression used to
apprize the dishonest shopkeeper that the speaker had stolen yarn to
sell.—_Norwich Cant._

~Hell~, a fashionable gambling-house. Small places of this kind are
called “silver hells.” Reason obvious.

~Hell and Tommy~, utter destruction.

~Helter-skelter~, anyhow, without regard to order or precedence.

~Hempen cravat~, the hangman’s noose.

~Hen and Chickens~, large and small pewter pots.

~Hen-pecked~, said of one whose wife “wears the breeches.” From the
action of the hen in paired cage-birds.

~Herring-pond~, the sea; “to be sent across the HERRING-POND,” to be
transported.

~Hiding~, a thrashing. Webster gives this word, but not its root, HIDE,
to beat, to flay by whipping. Most likely from the part attacked. The
threat of thrashing is sometimes conveyed thus:—“I’ll tan (or dress)
your HIDE.”

~Higgledy-piggledy~, confusedly, all together,—as pigs lie.

~High and dry~, an epithet applied to the _soi-disant_ “orthodox” clergy
of the last century, for whom, while ill-paid curates did the work, the
comforts of the Establishment were its greatest charms.

    “Wherein are various ranks, and due degrees,
    The Bench for honour, and the Stall for ease.”

Though often confounded with, they are utterly dissimilar to, the modern
High Church or Anglo-Catholic party, who now receive the title at times;
while their opponents receive the corresponding appellation of “Low and
Slow,” and the so-called “Broad Church” is defined with equal felicity as
the “Broad and Shallow.” Humourists have divided these three portions of
one Church into Attitudinarians, Platitudinarians, and Latitudinarians.

~High Church~, term used in contradistinction from “Low Church.”

~Highfalutin’~, showy, affected, tinselled, affecting certain pompous or
fashionable airs, stuck up; “come, none of yer HIGHFALUTIN’ games,”
_i.e._, you must not show off or imitate the swell here.—_American_
slang, now common in Liverpool and the East-end of London. From the
_Dutch_, VERLOOTEN. Used generally now in the sense of fustian,
high-sounding, unmeaning eloquence, bombast.

~High-flier~, anything above the common order. Apt students, fast
coaches, and special trains are sufficient instances of the extreme
openness of the qualification.

~High-fly~, “ON THE HIGH-FLY,” on the genteel or letter-bearing begging
system.

~High-flyer~, a genteel beggar or swindler. A begging-letter impostor.

~High-flyer~, a large swing, in frames, at fairs and races. The first
fast coaches were called high-flyers on account of their desperate
speed.

~High jinks~, “ON THE HIGH JINKS,” taking up an arrogant position,
assuming an undue superiority. Scott explains this game in _Guy
Mannering_. Nowadays HIGH JINKS is often used to mean a jollification.

~High-lows~, laced boots reaching a trifle higher than ankle-jacks.

~High-strikes~, corruption of _Hysterics_.

~Hipped~, bored, offended, crossed, low-spirited, &c. This may have been
originally hypped, and have had some connexion with hypochondriacal
affections.

~Hitched~, an Americanism for married. From the word HITCH, used in
America in the sense of to harness.

~Hittite~, a facetious sporting term for a prize-fighter. Derived from
the Bible.

~Hivite~, a student of St. Begh’s College, Cumberland, which is
pronounced and generally written St. Bee’s. Literally, Hive-ite.

~Hoax~, to deceive, or ridicule,—Grose says this was originally a
University cant word. Corruption of HOCUS, to cheat.

~Hob and nob~, to act in concert with another; to lay “heads together;”
to touch glasses in drinking; to fraternize in a convivial meeting or
merry-making. Originally meaning “foot and head,”—the touching of the
top of one glass with the bottom of another, and then reversing the
order. Nowadays it means simply to clink glasses together as a
salutation before imbibing.

~Hobbadehoy~, a youth who has ceased to regard himself as a boy, and is
not yet regarded as a man.

~Hobble~, trouble of any kind. A man is said to be in a HOBBLE when he
has offended the proprieties in any way, “from pitch and toss to
manslaughter.”

~Hobbled~, committed for trial; properly said of animals fed by the
wayside, with their forelegs fastened together. Hence people who gather
burdens about them are said to get into HOBBLES.

~Hob Collingwood~, according to Brockett, a north country term for the
four of hearts, considered an unlucky card.

~Hobson’s choice~, “this or none.” Hobson was a carrier at Cambridge,
and also a letter-out of horses for hire; and is said to have always
compelled his customers to take the horse that stood in the stall next
the stable-door or none at all. He was a benefactor to the town, and
Hobson’s Conduit still stands as a memorial of him.

~Hock-dockies~, shoes.

~Hocks~, the feet and ankles; CURBY HOCKS, round or clumsy feet and
ankles. Term originating with horsey men.

~Hocus~, to drug a person for purposes of robbery. The potion generally
consists of snuff and beer among rogues of the lowest class, and is by
them called “snuffing a bloke;” or sometimes, when the drug is
administered to a woman for purposes other than those of robbery,
“snuffing a blowen.”

~Hocus pocus~, gipsy words of magic, similar to the modern “presto fly.”
The gipsies pronounce “_Habeas Corpus_,” HAWCUS PACCUS (_see_ Crabb’s
_Gipsies’ Advocate_, p. 18); can this have anything to do with the
origin of HOCUS POCUS? Turner gives OCHUS BOCHUS, an old demon. Pegge,
however, states that it is a burlesque rendering of the words of the
Roman Catholic Church service at the delivery of the host, HOC EST
CORPUS, which the early Protestants considered as a species of
conjuring, and ridiculed accordingly.

~Hodge~, a countryman or provincial clown. Most country districts in
England have one or more families in the name of HODGE; indeed, GILES
and HODGE appear to be the favourite hobnail nomenclature. HODGE is said
to be simply an abbreviation of Roger.

~Hog~, a shilling.—_Old Cant._

~Hog~, “to go the whole HOG;” “the whole HOG or none,” to do anything
with a person’s entire strength, not “by halves;” realized by the phrase
“in for a penny in for a pound.” Bartlett claims this to be a pure
American phrase; whilst Ker, of course, gives it a Dutch origin.—_Old._
“To go the whole HOG” is frequently altered by those people who believe
there is wit in circumlocution, into “the entire animal,” or “the
complete swine!”

~Hoga~, do. “That wont HOGA,” _i.e._, that wont do, is one of the very
commonest of the Anglo-Indian slang phrases.

~Hogmagundy~, the process by which the population is increased.

    “There’s many a job that day begun
    That ends in Hogmagundy.”—_Burns._

~Hogmany night~, New Year’s Eve, when presents are solicited by the
young folk.—_Scotch._

~Hogo~, a tremendous stench. From _haut goût_. Now often pronounced
FOGO.

~Hoisting~, shoplifting.

~Hold hard~, an exclamation made when a sudden stoppage is desired.
Originally an expression used in riding or driving, now general.

~Hollow~, “to beat HOLLOW,” to excel.

~Holy Joe~, a sea-term for a parson.

~Holy Land~, a very old term for the Seven Dials,—where St. Giles’s
Greek is spoken.

~Homo~, a man. _Lingua Franca_; but _see_ OMEE, the more usual Cockney
pronunciation.

~Hondey~, a Manchester name for an omnibus, and the abbreviation of
HONDEYBUSH, the original Lancashire pronunciation of the word.

~Honest Shilling~, a shilling earned by a process actually immoral, but
not positively illegal. The money earned by a prostitute is said to be
honest, as distinguished from that obtained by a thief. Probably from
the story of the converted burglar, who determined to sin no more
himself, and who lectured against dishonesty, but sent his wife out
regularly every evening with instructions to earn an HONEST SHILLING.

~Honey blobs~, a Scotch term for large ripe, yellow gooseberries.

~Honour bright~, an asseveration which means literally, “by my honour,
which is bright and unsullied.” It is often still further curtailed to
“HONOUR!” only.

~Hook~, an expression at Oxford, implying doubt, either connected with
Hookey Walker, or with a note of interrogation (?) “Yes, with a HOOK at
the end of it!” _i.e._, with some reservation, generally that of doubt,
by the speaker.

~Hook~, to steal or rob. _See_ the following.

~Hook or by crook~, by fair means or foul—in allusion to the hook with
which footpads used to steal from open windows, &c., and from which
HOOK, to take or steal, has been derived. Mentioned in _Hudibras_ as a
cant term.

~Hook it~, “get out of the way,” or “be off about your business;”
generally varied by “take your HOOK.” “To HOOK it,” to run away, to
decamp; “on one’s own HOOK,” dependent upon one’s own exertions.
Originally connected with the preceding, but now perfectly “on its own
HOOK.”

~Hookey walker!~ ejaculation of incredulity, usually shortened to
WALKER!—which _see_.

~Hooks~, “dropped off the HOOKS,” said of a deceased person—possibly
derived from the ancient practice of suspending on hooks the quarters of
a traitor or felon sentenced by the old law to be hung, drawn, and
quartered, which dropped off the hooks as they decayed.

~Hook um snivey~ (formerly “HOOK and SNIVEY”), a low expression, meaning
to cheat by feigning sickness or other means. Also a piece of thick iron
wire crooked at one end, and fastened into a wooden handle, for the
purpose of undoing from the outside the wooden bolt of a door. Sometimes
used as an irrelevant answer by street boys. As, “who did that?”—“HOOK
UM SNIVEY”—actually no one.

~Hop~, a dance.—_Fashionable slang._

~Hop merchant~, a dancing master.

~Hop o’ my thumb~, an undersized person. From the story of that name.
Portion of a set of phrases established for the benefit of the small, in
which Tomtit, Little Breeches, Daniel Lambert, Sixfoot, Twentystun, &c.,
play a prominent part.

~Hopping Giles~, a cripple. St. Ægidius or Giles, himself similarly
afflicted, was the patron saint of lazars and cripples. The ancient
lazar houses were dedicated to him.

~Hoppo~, custom-house officer, or custom-house. Almost anything
connected with custom-house business.—_Anglo-Chinese._

~Hop the twig~, to run away; also, a flippant expression meaning to die.
Many similar phrases are used by the thoughtless and jocose, as “laying
down one’s knife and fork,” “pegging out,” from the game of cribbage,
and “snuffing it.” A new form of this phraseology is to say that a man
has “given up” or “given in.”

~Hornswoggle~, nonsense, humbug. Believed to be of American origin.

~Horrors~, the low spirits, or “blue devils,” which follow intoxication.
Incipient _del. trem._

~Horse~, contraction of Horsemonger-Lane Gaol, also a slang term for a
five-pound note.

~Horse~, to flog. From the old wooden horse or flogging-stool.

~Horsebreaker.~ _See_ PRETTY HORSEBREAKER.

~Horse chaunter~, a dealer who takes worthless horses to country fairs
and disposes of them by artifice. He is generally an unprincipled
fellow, and will put in a glass eye, fill a beast with shot, plug him
with ginger, or in fact do anything so that he sells to advantage. _See_
COPER.

~Horse marine~, an awkward person. In ancient times the “jollies,” or
Royal Marines, were the butts of the sailors, from their ignorance of
seamanship. “Tell that to the MARINES, the blue jackets wont believe
it!” was a common rejoinder to a “stiff yarn.” A HORSE MARINE (an
impossibility) was used to denote one more awkward even than an ordinary
“jolly.” Nowadays the MARINES are deservedly appreciated as one of the
finest regiments in the service.

~Horse nails.~ At the game of cribbage, when a player finds it his
policy to keep his antagonist back, rather than push himself forward,
and plays accordingly, he is sometimes said “to feed his opponent on
HORSE NAILS.”

~Horse nails~, money.—_Compare_ BRADS.

~Horse’s nightcap~, a halter; “to die in a HORSE’S NIGHTCAP,” to be
hanged.

~Horsey~, like a groom or jockey. Applied also to persons who affect the
turf in dress or conversation.

~Hot coppers~, the feverish sensations experienced in the morning by
those who have been drunk over-night.

~Hot tiger~, an Oxford mixture of hot-spiced ale and sherry.

~House of Commons~, a humorous term for the closet of decency.

~Houses;~ “safe as HOUSES,” an expression to satisfy a doubting person;
“Oh! it’s as safe as HOUSES,” _i.e._, perfectly safe, apparently in
allusion to the paying character of house property as an investment. It
is said the phrase originated when the railway bubbles began to burst,
and when people began to turn their attention to the more ancient forms
of speculation, which though slow were sure.

~Housewarming~, the first friendly gathering in a new or
freshly-occupied house.

~How-came-you-so?~ intoxicated.

~How much?~ A facetious way of asking for an explanation of any
difficult or pedantic expression. “Why don’t you cook your potatoes in
an anhydrohepsaterion?” A waggish listener might be excused for asking,
“An anhydro—HOW MUCH!”

~How’s your poor feet?~ an idiotic street cry with no meaning, much in
vogue a few years back.

~Hoxter~, an inside pocket.—_Old English_, OXTER. Probably the low
slang word HUXTER, money, is derived from this. OXTER is, among the
Irish, an armpit.

~Hubble bubble~, the Indian pipe termed a hookah is thus designated,
from the noise it makes when being smoked.

~Huey~, a town or village.—_Tramps’ term._

~Huff~, a dodge or trick; “don’t try that HUFF on me,” or “that HUFF
wont do.” Also a term in the game of draughts,—the penalty for failing
to take an opponent’s piece when an opportunity occurs.

~Huff~, to vex, to offend; a poor temper. HUFFY, easily offended.
HUFFED, annoyed, offended. Some folk are tersely and truly described as
easily HUFFED.

~Hugger-mugger~, underhand, sneaking. Also, “in a state of
HUGGER-MUGGER” means to be muddled.

~Hulk~, to hang about in hopes of an invitation. _See_ MOOCH.

~Hulky~, extra-sized.—_Shropshire._ From this and from hulk we probably
get our adjective HULKING, as applied to the great lazy ruffians who
infest low neighbourhoods.

~Hum and haw~, to hesitate, or raise objections.—_Old English._

~Humble pie~, to “eat HUMBLE PIE,” to knock under, to be submissive. The
UMBLES, or entrails, and other unprime parts of a deer, were anciently
made into a dish for servants, while their masters feasted off the
haunch.

~Hum-box~, a pulpit. This is a very old term.

~Humbug~, an imposition, or a person who imposes upon others. A very
expressive but slang word, synonymous at one time with HUM AND HAW.
Lexicographers for a long time objected to the adoption of this term.
Richardson uses it frequently to express the meaning of other words,
but, strange to say, omits it in the alphabetical arrangement as
unworthy of recognition! In the first edition of this work, 1785 was
given as the earliest date at which the word could be found in a printed
book. Since then HUMBUG has been traced half a century further back, on
the title-page of a singular old jest-book—“_The Universal Jester_; or
a pocket companion for the Wits: being a choice collection of merry
conceits, facetious drolleries, &c., clenchers, closers, closures,
bon-mots, and HUMBUGS,” by Ferdinando Killigrew. London, about 1735-40.

The notorious Orator Henley was known to the mob as ORATOR HUMBUG. The
fact may be learned from an illustration in that exceedingly curious
little collection of _Caricatures_, published in 1757, many of which
were sketched by Lord Bolingbroke—Horace Walpole filling in the names
and explanations. Halliwell describes HUMBUG as “a person who hums,” and
cites Dean Milles’s MS., which was written about 1760. In the last
century, the game now known as double-dummy was termed HUMBUG. Lookup, a
notorious gambler, was struck down by apoplexy when playing at this
game. On the circumstance being reported to Foote, the wit said—“Ah, I
always thought he would be HUMBUGGED out of the world at last!” It has
been stated that the word is a corruption of Hamburgh, from which town
so many false bulletins and reports came during the war in the last
century. “Oh, that is _Hamburgh_ [or HUMBUG],” was the answer to any
fresh piece of news which smacked of improbability. Grose mentions it in
his Dictionary, 1785; and in a little printed squib, published in 1808,
entitled _Bath Characters_, by T. Goosequill, HUMBUG is thus mentioned
in a comical couplet on the title-page:—

    “Wee Thre Bath Deities bee,
    HUMBUG, Follie, and Varietee.”

Gradually from this time the word began to assume a place in periodical
literature, and in novels written by not over-precise authors. In the
preface to a flat, and most likely unprofitable poem, entitled, _The
Reign of HUMBUG, a Satire_, 8vo, 1836, the author thus apologizes for
the use of the word:—“I have used the term HUMBUG to designate this
principle [wretched sophistry of life generally], considering that, it
is now adopted into our language as much as the words dunce, jockey,
cheat, swindler, &c., which were formerly only colloquial terms.” A
correspondent, who in a number of _Adversaria_ ingeniously traced
bombast to the inflated Doctor Paracelsus Bombast, considers that HUMBUG
may, in like manner, be derived from Homberg, the distinguished chemist
of the court of the Duke of Orleans, who, according to the following
passage from Bishop Berkeley’s _Siris_, was an ardent and successful
seeker after the philosopher’s stone!

    “§194.—Of this there cannot be a better proof than the experiment
    of Monsieur Homberg, who made gold of mercury by introducing light
    into its pores, but at such trouble and expense that, I suppose,
    nobody will try the experiment for profit. By this injunction of
    light and mercury, both bodies became fixed, and produced a
    third different to either, to wit, real gold. For the truth
    of which fact I refer to the memoirs of the French Academy of
    Sciences.”—_Berkeley’s Works_, vol ii. p. 366 (Wright’s edition).

Another derivation suggested is that of AMBAGE, a Latin word adopted
into the English language _temp._ Charles I. (_see_ May’s translation
of Lucan’s _Pharsalia_), and meaning conduct the reverse of
straightforward. Again, in the (burlesque) _Loves of Hero and Leander_
(date 1642), we find “MUM-BUG, quoth he, ’twas known of yore,” a cant
expression, no doubt, commanding a person to “shut up,” or hold his
tongue, and evidently derived from the game of _mum-budget_ or
_silence_, upon which Halliwell (_Dict. Arch_.) has descanted.

    AMBAGE is also used in the sense of “circumlocution.” “Without any
    long studie or tedious AMBAGE.”—_Puttenham_, _Art of Poesie_.

    “Umh! y’ are full of AMBAGE.”—_Decker’s Whore of Babylon_, 1607.

    “Thus from her cell Cumæan Sibyl sings
    Ambiguous AMBAGES, the cloyster rings
    With the shrill sound thereof, in most dark strains.”

        _Vicar’s Virgil_, 1632.

De Quincey thus discourses upon the word:—

    “The word HUMBUG, for instance, rests upon a rich and comprehensive
    basis; it cannot be rendered adequately either by German or by
    Greek, the two richest of human languages; and without this
    expressive word we should all be disarmed for one great case,
    continually recurrent, of social enormity. A vast mass of villany,
    that cannot otherwise be reached by legal penalties, or brought
    within the rhetoric of scorn, would go at large with absolute
    impunity were it not through the stern Rhadamanthean aid of this
    virtuous and inexorable word.”—_Article on “Language.”_

The original collater of these notes purchased the collection of essays
known as the _Connoisseur_ at the sale of Thackeray’s library. At the
end of vol. i. he found a memorandum in the great humourist’s
handwriting—“p. 108, ‘HUMBUG,’ a new-coined expression.” On referring
to that page (in the 3rd edition, 1757) this paragraph was noted:—

    “The same conduct of keeping close to their ranks was observed at
    table, where the ladies seated themselves together. Their
    conversation was here also confined wholly to themselves, and seemed
    like the mysteries of the _Bona Dea_, in which men were forbidden to
    have any share. It was a continued laugh and whisper from the
    beginning to the end of dinner. A whole sentence was scarce ever
    spoken aloud. Single words, indeed, now and then broke forth; such
    as, odious, horrible, detestable, shocking, HUMBUG. This last
    new-coined expression, which is only to be found in the nonsensical
    vocabulary, sounds absurd and disagreeable whenever it is
    pronounced; but from the mouth of a lady it is ‘shocking,’
    ‘detestable,’ ‘horrible,’ and ‘odious.’”

The use of this term is almost universal; in California there is a town
called Humbug Flat—a name which gives a significant hint of the
acuteness of the first settler.

~Humdrum~, monotonous, tedious, tiresome, boring; “a society of
gentlemen who used to meet near the Charter House, and at the King’s
Head, St. John’s Street, Clerkenwell. They were characterized by less
mystery and more pleasantry than the Freemasons.”—_Bacchus and Venus_,
1737. In the West the term applies to a low cart.

~Humming~, strong as applied to drink. Extra strong ale is often
characterized as “HUMMING October.” Maybe from its effect on heads not
quite so strong.

~Hump~, low spirits. A costermonger who was annoyed or distressed about
anything would describe himself as having “the HUMP.”

~Hump~, to botch, or spoil.

~Hump up~, “to have one’s HUMP UP,” to be cross or ill-tempered—like a
cat with its back set up. _See_ BACK and MONKEY.

~Humpty-dumpty~, short and thick; all of a heap; all together, like an
egg.

    “HUMPTY-DUMPTY sat on a wall.”

Also a hunchback. HUMPTY is an abbreviated form of the expression.

~Hunch~, to shove, or jostle.

~Hunks~, a miserly fellow, a curmudgeon.

~Hunky~, an American term which means good, jolly, &c. As, “a HUNKY
boy,” a good jovial fellow; and “everything went off HUNKY.”

~Hunter pitching~, the game of cockshies—three throws a penny.—_See_
COCKSHY.

~Hurdy-gurdy~, a droning musical instrument shaped like a large fiddle,
and turned by a crank, used by Savoyards and other itinerant foreign
musicians in England, now nearly superseded by the hand-organ. From the
peculiar noise made by the instrument, which in Italy is called “viola.”

~Hurkaru~, a messenger.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Husbands’ boat~, the Saturday afternoon packet to Margate during the
summer season. So called for obvious reasons. The passengers by this
boat come in for an unusual share of attention from the cads peculiar to
this watering-place.

~Husbands’ tea~, very weak tea. _See_ WATER BEWITCHED.

~Hush-money~, a sum given to quash a prosecution or stay evidence. Money
given to any one for the purpose of quieting him.

~Hush-shop~, or CRIB, a shop where beer and spirits are sold “on the
quiet”—no licence being paid.

~Huxter~, money. Term much in use among costermongers and low sharpers.
Probably from OXTER or HOXTER.

~Hyps~, or HYPO, the blue devils. From HYPOCHONDRIASIS.—_Swift._

~Hy-yaw!~ an interjectional exclamation of
astonishment.—_Anglo-Chinese._

~Ikey~, a Jew “fence.” Corruption of Isaac, a common Hebrew name.

~Imperence~, servant-girl currency for impudence or impertinence. “Now,
then, Mr. IMPERENCE, leave off now, do,” seems, however, to have faded
away with Greenwich, Bartlemy, and kindred fairs.

~Improve the occasion~, a slang term much in use among Chadbands and
Stigginses, who never lose an opportunity of IMPROVING the condition of
either pockets or stomachs at the expense of the credulous.

~In~, “to be IN with a person,” to be even with, or up to him; also, to
be on intimate terms, or in partnership, with him.

~Inexpressibles~, UNUTTERABLES, UNMENTIONABLES, UNWHISPERABLES, or SIT
UPONS, trousers, the nether garments. All affected terms, having their
origin in a most unpleasant squeamishness.

~Infantry~, nursery term for children; LIGHT INFANTRY, fleas.

~In for it~, in trouble or difficulty of any kind. As, “You’re IN FOR
IT, I wouldn’t stand in your shoes for a trifle.”

~In for patter~, waiting for trial, referring to the speeches of
counsel, the statements of witnesses, the summing up of the judge,
&c.,—the fuss of which the prisoner sets down as “all so much PATTER.”

~Innings~, earnings, good fortune; “he’s had a long INNINGS,” _i.e._, a
good run of luck, with plenty of cash flowing in. From the distinction
between INNINGS and outings at cricket and kindred games.

~Inside lining~, dinner, &c.

~Interesting~, “to be in an INTERESTING situation,” applied to females
when _enceinte_.

~Interview~, to inspect privately with a view to obtaining information
which shall be afterwards published. Both the verb and its use have
their origin with our Transatlantic cousins, and “interviewing” by means
of special reporters, who question most minutely, is of frequent
occurrence,—of occurrence whenever opportunity offers. Should a man be
found guilty of murder, or start as a candidate for the Presidency, he
will be INTERVIEWED by “our special correspondent,” and there are
already signs of this objectionable form of newspaper work finding its
way here. Should a visitor of importance arrive in New York, the
conversation which passes, or is supposed to pass, between him and the
reporter will be found minutely described, with an elaborate
introduction. It is but fair to Americans, however, to say that the
gentleman to whom the credit, or discredit, of the invention of this
system belongs was a native of Great Britain, who invented many other
startling Americanisms during his residence in New York.

~Into~, “hold my hat, Jim, I’ll be INTO him,” _i.e._, I will fight him.
In this sense equivalent to pitch INTO, or slip INTO.

~Invite~, an invitation—a corruption used by stuck-up people of
mushroom origin. Often used, also, by people who know better, from their
desire for slang of any kind.

~Ipsal dixal~, Cockney corruption of _ipse dixit_—said of one’s simple
uncorroborated assertion.

~Irish American~, an Irishman who has been for some time resident in the
States; sometimes a man born in America of Irish parents. The Irish
American body is a power in the United States, and is the fount-spring
as well as the maintaining power of all Fenianism.

~Irish apricots~, potatoes.

~Irish Cockney~, a child born of Irish parents in any part of the
southern counties of England. It is a singular fact that Irishmen born
profess great abhorrence of IRISH COCKNEYS, while the latter despise all
Irish, and use the word as one of reproach. IRISH COCKNEYS were
originally only Cockneys born of an Irish strain, but the term has
proved very elastic, and threatens soon to mean any English-born person
whose descent is Hibernian. Liverpool will, however, always prove an
exception to the rule, as the name “Liverpool Irishmen” is given to
those who would in any southern part be called Cockneys.

~Irish theatre~, the temporary prison, guard-room, or lock-up in a
barracks. The fond fancy of the soldier supplies it with other
figurative appellations, as “the mill,” “the jigger,” “the house that
Jack built.” In Edinburgh Castle it is termed “the dryroom.”

~Irons in the fire~, a man is said to have too many IRONS IN THE FIRE
when he turns his attention to too many occupations or enterprises at
once.

~Isthmus of Suez~, the covered bridge at St. John’s College, Cambridge,
which connects the college with its grounds on the other side of the
river.—_See_ CRACKLE.

~Ivories~, teeth; “a box of IVORIES,” a set of teeth, the mouth; “wash
your IVORIES,” _i.e._, “drink.” The word is also used to denote dice.

~Jabber~, to talk, or chatter. A cant word in Swift’s time. Probably
from GIBBER.

~Jack~, the knave of trumps, at the game of all-fours.

~Jack-at-a-pinch~, one whose assistance is only sought on an emergency.
Jack-in-the-water, an attendant at the watermen’s stairs on the river
and sea-port towns, who does not mind wetting his feet for a customer’s
convenience, in consideration of a douceur.

~Jacked-up~, ruined, done for. To JACK-UP is to leave off doing anything
suddenly. _See_ CHUCK-UP.

~Jacket~, the skin of a potato which has not been pared before cooking.
In Ireland potatoes are generally served “with their JACKETS on.”

~Jacketing~, a thrashing. Similar term to leathering, cowhiding, &c.

~Jackey~, gin. _Seven Dials_ originally. Nearly general now.

~Jack-in-the-box~, a small but powerful kind of screw, used by burglars
to break open safes.

~Jack Ketch~, the public hangman.—_See_ KETCH.

~Jack Nasty-face~, a sailor.—_Sea._ NASTY-FACE is a term applied often
in London streets to an ugly or unpleasant-looking person.

~Jacks~, AND HALF-JACKS, card counters, resembling in size and
appearance sovereigns and half-sovereigns, for which they are
occasionally passed to simple persons. In large gambling establishments
the “heaps of gold” are frequently composed of JACKS. JACKS are not, as
they are sometimes supposed to be, counterfeit coins; they are simply
little medals, and so “magsmen” and “street muggers” carry them with
less concern than they would feel were their pockets loaded with
spurious money.

~Jack Sprat~, a diminutive boy or man.

~Jack Tar~, a sailor.

~Jacob~, a ladder. Grose says, from Jacob’s dream.—_Old Cant._

~Jacob’s ladder~, a longitudinal flaw in the leg of a ballet-girl’s
tights.

~Jagger~, a gentleman. _German_, JAGER, a sportsman.

~Jail-bird~, a prisoner, one who has been in jail.

~James~, a sovereign, or twenty shillings. From JACOBUS, the James II.
guinea.

~Jannock~, sociable, fair dealing.—_Norfolk._ Generally now JONNICK,
which _see_.

~Japan~, to ordain. Having evident reference to the black clothes which
follow ordination.—_University._

~Jark~, a “safe-conduct” pass.—_Oxford._ Old cant for a seal.

~Jarvey~, the driver of a hackney-coach; “JARVEY’S upper Benjamin,” a
coachman’s overcoat, with many capes. An ingenious etymology has been
found for JARVEY, thus:—JARVEY, vernacular for Geoffrey, which was
often written Geo. (gee-ho), hence JARVEY. This is open to considerable
objection, as George is shortened in similar manner to that shown above.
Still it is worthy of record, independently of its ingenuity, being as
exact as many accepted derivations.

~Jaw~, speech, or talk; “hold your JAW,” don’t speak any more; “what are
you JAWING about?” _i.e._, what are you making a noise about?

~Jaw~, to talk without cessation, to scold vehemently.

~Jawbone~, credit.

    “We have a few persons whose pockets are to let—men who have more
    complaints than dollars—individuals who, in digger’s parlance, live
    on JAWBONE (credit), and are always to be found at saloons; a class
    of men who, when they are here, wish themselves yonder, and when
    yonder, wish themselves back.”—_Times Correspondent, San Francisco,
    Oct. 21, 1862._

~Jaw-breaker~, a hard or excessively long word. Also, in pugilistic
sense, a hard blow on the side of the face.

~Jaw-twister~, a hard or many-syllabled word. Elaboration of preceding.

~Jazey~, a wig. A corruption of JERSEY, the name for flax prepared in a
peculiar manner, of which common wigs were formerly made; “the cove with
the JAZEY,” _i.e._, the judge.

~Jeames~ (a generic for “flunkeys”), the _Morning Post_ newspaper—the
organ of Belgravia and the “Haristocracy.”

~Jehu~, old slang term for a coachman, or one fond of
driving.—_Biblical._

~Jeminy O!~ a vulgar expression of surprise.

~Jemmy~, a sheep’s-head.—_See_ SANGUINARY JAMES.

~Jemmy~, a short crowbar, which generally takes to pieces, for the
convenience of housebreakers.

~Jemmy ducks~, the man whose business it is to look after the poultry on
board a ship.—_Sea._

~Jemmy Jessamy~, a dandy.

~Jemmy-John~, a jar for holding liquor; probably a corruption of
demi-gallon, by means of DEMI-JOHN.

~Jeremiad~, a lament; derived, of course, from the Book of Lamentations,
written by the Prophet Jeremiah.

~Jeremy Diddler~, an adept at raising the wind, _i.e._, at borrowing,
especially at borrowing with no intention of repaying. _See_ the farce
of _Raising the Wind_.

~Jericho~, an improper quarter of Oxford. A lady visitor once writing
her name down in the visitors’ book at the Bodleian or elsewhere, for a
joke put down her residence as “Jericho,” to the no small disgust of her
undergraduate friend.—_University._

~Jerry~, a chamber utensil; abbreviation of JEROBOAM.—_Swift._

~Jerry~, a watch. “JERRY nicking” or “JERRY sneaking” is watch-stealing,
which is a distinct form of street robbery, and requires both courage
and dexterity; for it is done, as the thieves say, “right afore a
bloke’s face.”

~Jerry~, to jibe or chaff cruelly. Development of jeer.

~Jerry-go-nimble~, the diarrhœa. Derivation apparent.

~Jerry Lynch~, a pig’s head pickled. Term usually applied to the long
Irish heads which are sent over here for sale in the poorer districts of
London, and which are vastly different from the heads of “dairy-fed”
porkers.

~Jerry shop~, a beer-house. Contraction of “Tom and Jerry.”

~Jerry Sneak~, a hen-pecked husband,—a character in the _Mayor of
Garret_. Also, a stealer of watches.

~Jerusalem pony~, a donkey.

~Jessie~, “to give a person JESSIE,” to beat him soundly. _See_ GAS.

~Jew fencer~, a Jew street salesman.

~Jew’s eye~, a popular simile for anything valuable. Probably a
corruption of the _Italian_, GIOJE; _French_, JOAILLE, a jewel. In
ancient times, when a king was short of cash, he generally issued orders
for so many JEWS’ EYES, or equivalent sums of money. The Jews preferred
paying the ransom, although often very heavy. It is notorious that in
this country the order often went forth to draw Jews’ teeth in the
event of their refusing to contribute so much to the Exchequer. A
probable idea is, that as a Jew’s teeth brought in so much money, the
value of a JEW’S EYE must be something fabulous. Possibly, also, from
the _lex talionis_ so strongly believed in by Jews,—an eye for an eye,
and nothing less. The term is used by Shakspeare.

~Jezebel~, a showily-dressed woman of suspected character; derived, of
course, from 2 Kings ix. 30, but applied in this sense from the time of
the Puritans. Also, a hot-tempered female.

~Jib~, a first-year man.—_Dublin University._

~Jib~, or JIBBER, a horse that starts or shrinks. Shakspeare uses it in
the sense of a worn-out horse.

~Jib~, the face, or a person’s expression; “the cut of his JIB,” _i.e._,
his peculiar appearance. That sail of a ship, which in position and
shape, corresponds to the nose on a person’s face.—_Sea._ A vessel is
often known by the cut of the JIB sail; hence the popular phrase, “to
know a man by the cut of his JIB.”

~Jibb~, the tongue.—_Gipsy_ and _Hindoo_. (Tramps’ term.) Thence
extended to mean language.

~Jiffy~, “in a JIFFY,” in a moment.

~Jigger~, a door; “dub the JIGGER,” shut the door. _Ancient cant_,
GYGER. In billiards, the bridge or rest is often termed the JIGGER.
Also, the curtain of a theatre. JIGGER has many meanings, the word being
applied to any small mechanical contrivance. Printers use the word for a
little machine which guides the eye when copy is minute.

~Jigger~, a secret still for the manufacture of illicit spirits.

~Jigger~, “I’m JIGGERED if you will,” a common form of mild swearing.
_See_ SNIGGER.

~Jigger-dubber~, a term applied to a gaoler or turnkey.

~Jiggot o’ mutton~, a leg of mutton. From _Fr._ GIGOT.

~Jilt~, a crowbar or house-breaking implement.

~Jingo~, “by JINGO,” a common form of oath, said to be a corruption of
ST. GINGOULPH. _Vide_ Halliwell.

~Jo~, Scotticism for a man or lover. As “John Anderson, my JO, John.”

~Job~, “a JOB lot,” otherwise called a “sporting lot,” any miscellaneous
goods purchased at a cheap rate, or to be sold a bargain. Frequently
used to conceal the fact of their being stolen, or otherwise dishonestly
obtained.

~Job~, a short piece of work, a prospect of employment. Johnson
describes JOB as a low word, without etymology. It is, and was, however,
a cant word; and a JOB, two centuries ago, was an arranged robbery. Even
at the present day it is mainly confined to the streets, in the sense of
employment for a short time. Amongst undertakers a JOB signifies a
funeral; “to do a JOB,” conduct any one’s funeral; “by the JOB,” _i.e._,
piece-work, as opposed to time-work. A JOB in political phraseology is a
Government office or contract, obtained by secret influence or
favouritism. Any unfair arrangement is now called a JOB.

~Job~, a sudden blow, as “a JOB in the eye.” Also used as a verb, “I’ll
JOB this here knife in your ribs.”

~Jobation~, a chiding, a reprimand, a trial of the hearer’s patience.

~Jobbery~, the arrangement of jobs, or unfair business proceedings.

~Job’s comfort~, reproof instead of consolation.

~Job’s comforter~, one who brings news of additional misfortunes. Both
these words are of Biblical origin.

~Job’s turkey~, “as poor as JOB’S TURKEY,” as thin and as badly fed as
that ill-conditioned and imaginary bird.

~Jocteleg~, a shut-up knife. Corruption of Jacques de Liège, a famous
cutler.

~Joe~, a too marvellous tale, a lie, or a stale joke. Abbreviated from
JOE MILLER. The full name is occasionally used, as in the phrase “I
don’t see the JOE MILLER of it,” _i.e._, I don’t perceive the wit you
intend, or I don’t see the fun of doing it,—whatever may have been the
request.

~Joey~, a fourpenny piece. The term is derived (like BOBBY from Sir
Robert Peel) from Joseph Hume. The explanation is thus given in
Hawkins’s _History of the Silver Coinage of England_:—

    “These pieces are said to have owed their existence to the pressing
    instance of Mr. Hume, from whence they, for some time, bore the
    nickname of JOEYS. As they were very convenient to pay short cab
    fares, the hon. M.P. was extremely unpopular with the drivers, who
    frequently received only a groat where otherwise they would have
    received a sixpence without any demand for change.”

The term, therefore, was originated by the London cabmen, who have
invented many other popular phrases. Fancy offering a modern hansom
cabman a JOEY!

~Jog-trot~, a slow but regular trot, or pace.

~Jogul~, to play up, at cards or other game. _Spanish_, JUGAR.

~John Blunt~, a straightforward, honest, outspoken man.

~Johnny~, half-a-glass of whisky.—_Irish._

~Johnny Darbies~, a nickname for policemen, an evident corruption of the
_French_ GENSDARMES. Also, a term applied to handcuffs.—_See_ DARBIES.

~Johnny Raw~, a newly-enlisted soldier.

~John Orderly~, the signal to shorten the performance at a show.
Whenever the master, who remains on the platform outside to take the
money and regulate the performance, desires to refill the booth, he
pokes his head inside and shouts, “Is JOHN ORDERLY there?” The actors
instantly cut the piece short, the curtain falls, and the spectators are
bundled out at the back, to make room for the fresh audience. According
to tradition, JOHN ORDERLY was a noted showman, who taught this move to
the no less noted Richardson. This is like the old story of the publican
who used to call out to his waiter, “A pot of ale, Robert,” when he
wished his customers to be served with the best; but “A pot of ale,
Bob,” when they had been drinking long enough not to distinguish good
stuff from the bad the latter order meant. One day after calling for Bob
many times, he reluctantly, at the request of a visitor, tasted the ale,
and found it was the best. Rushing out immediately afterwards, and
calling for Bob with all his voice, he was answered by his wife, who
said, “Why, Bob’s been out these three hours.”

~John Thomas~, a generic for “flunkeys,”—more especially footmen with
large calves and fine bushy whiskers.

~Jolly~, a Royal Marine.—_See_ HORSE MARINE.

~Jolly~, a word of praise, or favourable notice; “chuck Harry a JOLLY,
Bill,” _i.e._, go and praise up his goods, or buy of him, and speak well
of the article, that the crowd standing around his stall may think it a
good opportunity for laying out their money. This is called JOLLYING.
“Chuck a JOLLY,” lit. translated, is, throw “a shout” or “good word.”

~Jolly~, to abuse or vituperate, sometimes to “bear up” or “bonnet.” To
JOLLY a man often means to give him a piece of one’s mind. To JOLLY
“for” any one is another phase of the business mentioned in the
foregoing paragraph.

~Jomer~, a sweetheart, or favourite girl. _See_ BLOWER.

~Jonnick~, right, correct, proper. Said of a person or thing.

~Jordan~, a chamberpot. To throw the contents of a chamberpot over any
one is to christen him.

~Jorum~, a capacious vessel from which food is eaten, as broth or stew.

~Joskin~, a countryman.

~Jossop~, the syrup or juice in a fruit pie or pudding. Also, sauce or
gravy.—_School._

~Jow~, be off, be gone immediately. If the word Jehanum be added, it
forms a peremptory order to go to a place unmentionable to ears
polite.—_Anglo-Indian._ Our phrase, “Go to Jericho,” is probably a
modification of the Jehanum business.

~Judas~, a deceitful person; JUDAS-HAIRED, red-haired, deceitful. It is
generally believed that JUDAS ISCARIOT was red-haired. Painters seem to
have accepted this idea, with modifications as to the exact amount of
colour.

~Jug~, a prison of any kind. Contraction of “stone jug.”

~Julep~, one of a set of drinks peculiar to America. Generally prepared
with mint, and called a MINT-JULEP. Originally JULEP was a pleasant
liquid, in which nauseous medicines were taken. Its literal meaning is
rosewater, and it is derived from the Arabic.

~Jump~, to seize, or rob; to “JUMP a man,” to pounce upon him, and
either rob or maltreat him; “to JUMP a house,” to rob it.

~Jumped-up~, conceited, arrogant, setting full value on oneself.

~Jump-up-behind~, to endorse an accommodation-bill.

~Juniper~, gin. Derivation obvious.

~Junk~, salt beef.—_See_ OLD HORSE.

~Juwaub~, literally, in Hindostanee, an answer; but in Anglo-Indian
slang signifying a refusal. If an officer asks for leave and is refused,
he is said to be JUWAUBED; if a gentleman unsuccessfully proposes for
the hand of a lady, he is said to have got the JUWAUB.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Karibat~, food, literally rice and curry; the staple dish of both
natives and Europeans in India.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Keel-hauling~, a good thrashing or mauling, rough treatment,—from the
old nautical custom of punishing offenders by throwing them overboard
with a rope attached, and hauling them up from under the ship’s keel.
See full description of this barbarous practice in Marryat’s
_Snarleyyow_.

~Keep a pig~, an Oxford University phrase, which means to have a lodger.
A man whose rooms contain two bedchambers has sometimes, when his
college is full, to allow the use of one of them to a Freshman, who is
called under these circumstances a PIG. The original occupier is then
said to KEEP A PIG.

~Keep it up~, to prolong a debauch, or the occasion of a rejoicing,—a
metaphor drawn from the game of shuttlecock. People suffering from the
effects of drink are said to have been KEEPING IT UP.—_Grose._

~Kelter~, coin, money. Probably from GELT.

~Ken~, a house.—_Ancient cant._ KHAN, _Gipsy_ and _Oriental_.

⁂ All slang and cant words which end in KEN, such as SPIELKEN, SPINIKEN,
or BOOZINGKEN, refer to houses, and are mainly of Gipsy origin.

~Kennedy~, a poker; to “give KENNEDY” is to strike or kill with a poker.
A St. Giles’s term, so given from a man of that name being killed by a
poker.

~Kent rag~, or CLOUT, a cotton handkerchief.

~Kervorten~, a Cockneyism for QUARTERN or quarter-pint measure.
“KERVORTEN and three houts,” a quartern of liquor and glasses, each
holding a third of the quantity.

~Ketch~, or JACK KETCH, the popular name for a public hangman; derived
from a person of that name who officiated in the reign of Charles
II.—_See Macaulay’s History of England._

~Kettle of fish~, a mess or muddle of any kind. As, “Here’s a pretty
KETTLE OF FISH!”

~Key of the street~, an imaginary instrument said to be possessed by any
one locked out of doors.

~Kibosh~, nonsense, stuff, humbug; “it’s all KIBOSH,” _i.e._, palaver or
nonsense; to “put on the KIBOSH,” to run down, slander, degrade, &c. To
put the KIBOSH on anything is, latterly, to put an effectual end or stop
to it.

~Kick~, a moment; “I’ll be there in a KICK,” _i.e._, in a moment.

~Kick~, a pocket; _Gaelic_, CUACH, a bowl, a nest; _Scotch_, QUAIGH.

~Kick~, a sixpence; “two and a KICK,” two shillings and sixpence.

~Kick the bucket~, to die.—_Norfolk._ According to Forby, a metaphor
taken from the descent of a well or mine, which is of course absurd. The
Rev. E. S. Taylor supplies the following note from his MS. additions to
the work of the East-Anglian lexicographer:—

    “The allusion is to the way in which a slaughtered pig is hung
    up—viz., by passing the ends of a bent piece of wood behind the
    tendons of the hind legs, and so suspending it to a hook in a beam
    above. This piece of wood is locally termed a BUCKET, and so by a
    coarse metaphor the phrase came to signify to die.”

Another correspondent says the real signification of this phrase is to
commit suicide by hanging, from a method planned and carried out by an
ostler at an inn on the Great North Road. Standing on a bucket, he tied
himself up to a beam in the stable; he then KICKED THE BUCKET away from
under his feet, and in a few seconds was dead. The natives of the West
Indies have converted the expression into “kickeraboo.”

~Kick over the traces~, to be over-extravagant. Any one who has come to
grief by fast living is said to have KICKED OVER THE TRACES.

~Kick up~, a noise or disturbance.

~Kick up~, “to KICK UP a row,” to create a tumult.

~Kickeraboo~, dead. A West Indian negro’s phrase. _See_ KICK THE BUCKET,
of which phrase it is a corruption.

~Kickseys~, or KICKSIES, trousers.

~Kickshaws~, trifles; made, or French dishes—not English or
substantial. Anything of a fancy description now. Corruption of the
_French_ QUELQUES CHOSES.

~Kicksy~, troublesome, disagreeable. _German_, KECK, bold.

~Kid~, an infant, or child. From the German _kind_; or possibly from the
name for the young of a goat. Also, a shallow dish in which sailors
receive their portions of food.

~Kid~, to joke, to quiz, to hoax anybody. “No KID, now?” is a question
often asked by a man who thinks he is being hoaxed.

~Kidden~, or KIDKEN, a low lodging-house for boys.

~Kiddier~, a pork-butcher.

~Kiddily~, fashionably or showily; “KIDDILY togg’d,” showily dressed.

~Kiddleywink~, a small shop where are retailed the commodities of a
village store. Originally KIDDLE-A-WINK, from the offer made, with a
wink, to give you something out of the kettle or kiddle. In the west
country an alehouse. Also, a woman of unsteady habits.

~Kiddy~, a man, or boy. Formerly a low thief.

~Kiddyish~, frolicsome, jovial.

    “Think, on the KIDDYISH spree we had on such a day.”

        _Randall’s Diary, 1820._

~Kidment~, humbug, coarse chaff or jocularity.

~Kidnapper~, originally one who stole children. Now applied without
reference to the age or sex of those stolen. From “kid,” a child, and
“nab” (corrupted to “nap”), to steal, or seize.

~Kidney~, “of that KIDNEY,” of such a stamp; “strange KIDNEY,” odd
humour; “two of a KIDNEY,” two persons of a sort, or as like as two
peas, _i.e._, resembling each other like two kidneys in a bunch.—_Old._
“Attempt to put their hair out of KIDNEY.”—_Terræ Filius_, 1763.

~Kid-on~, to entice or incite a person to the perpetration of an act.

~Kidsman~, one who trains boys to thieve and pick pockets successfully.

~Kilkenny cat~, a popular simile for a voracious or desperate animal or
person, from the story of the two cats in that county, who are said to
have fought and bitten each other until a small portion of the tail of
one of them alone remained.

~Killing~, bewitching, fascinating. The term is akin to the phrase
“dressing to death.”

~Kilt~, an Irishism for badly beaten, but by no means equivalent with
killed.

~Kimbo~, or A-KIMBO, holding the arms in a bent position from the body,
and resting the hands upon the hips, in a bullying attitude. Said to be
from A SCHIMBO, bandy-legged, crooked, _Italian_; but more probably from
KIMBAW, the old cant for beating or bullying. _See Grose._ _Celtic_,
CAM, crooked.

~Kimmer~, a gossip, an acquaintance, same as CUMMER.—_Scotch._

    “What’s a’ the steer, KIMMER?”

~Kinchin~, a child.—_Old Cant._ From the _German_ diminutive, KINDCHEN,
a baby.

~Kinchin cove~, a man who robs children; a little man.—Ancient Cant.

~Kincob~, uniform, fine clothes, richly embroidered dresses. Really,
cloth of gold or silver.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Kingsman~, a handkerchief with yellow patterns upon a green ground, the
favourite coloured neckerchief of the costermongers. The women sometimes
wear KINGSMAN kerchiefs thrown over their shoulders. A coster will often
imagine his caste, or position, is at stake, if his KINGSMAN is not of
the most approved pattern. When he fights, his KINGSMAN is tied around
his waist as a belt. This partiality for a peculiar-coloured neckcloth
is part of the fondness for gaudy colours which at all times and in all
countries has been shown by the uncultivated. A strange similarity of
taste for certain colours exists amongst the Hindoos, Gipsies, and
London lower classes. Red and yellow (or orange) are the great
favourites, and in these hues the Hindoo selects his turban and his
robe; the gipsy his breeches, and his wife her shawl or gown; and the
costermonger, his plush waistcoat and favourite KINGSMAN. Among either
class, when a fight takes place, the greatest regard is paid to the
favourite coloured article of dress. The Hindoo lays aside his turban,
the gipsy folds up his fancy breeches or coat, whilst the pugilistic
costermonger of Covent Garden or Billingsgate removes his favourite
neckerchief to a part of his body, by the rules of the “ring,”
comparatively out of danger.

~King’s pictures~ (now, of course, QUEEN’S PICTURES), money.

~Kisky~, drunk, fuddled.

~Kiss-curl~, a small curl twisted on the temple. _See_ BOWCATCHER.

~Kisser~, the mouth.—_Pugilistic term._

~Kissing-crust~, the soft crust which marks where one loaf has been
broken from another.

~Kiss-me-quick~, the name given to the very small bonnets which have of
late years become fashionable.

~Kit~, a person’s baggage. Also, a collection of anything, “the whole
KIT of ’em,” the entire lot. _Anglo-Saxon_, KYTH.—_North._

~Kite~,—_see_ FLY THE KITE.

~Kitmegur~, an under-butler, a footman.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Kitna~, how much?—_Anglo-Indian._

~Knacker~, an old horse; a horse-slaughterer. Originally
_Gloucestershire_, but now general.

~Knap~, _i.q._, NAP, to break.—_Old English_, but nearly obsolete. _See
Ps_. xlvi. 9 (Prayer-book version), “He breaketh the bow, and KNAPPETH
the spear in sunder;” probably sibilated into “snap.”

~Knap~, to receive, to take. Generally applied to the receipt of
punishments; “oh, my! wont he just KNAP it when he gets home!”

~Knap~, to steal.—_Prison Cant._

~Knapping-jigger~, a turnpike gate; “to dub at the KNAPPING-JIGGER,” to
pay money at the turnpike.

~Knark~, a hard-hearted or savage person. The word is now usually spelt
NARK, and is applied to the lowest class of informers.

~Knife~, “to KNIFE a person,” to stab; an un-English custom, but a very
common expression.

~Knife-board~, the seat running along the roof of an omnibus.

            “On ’busses’ KNIFEBOARDS stretch’d,
    The City clerks all tongue-protruded lay.”

        _A Summer Idyll, by Arthur Smith._

~Knife it~, “cut it,” cease, stop, don’t proceed.

~Knight~, a common and ironical prefix to a man’s calling—thus, “KNIGHT
of the whip,” a coachman; “KNIGHT of the thimble,” a tailor.

~Knobstick~, a non-society workman. One who takes work under price.

~Knock about the bub~, to hand or pass about the drink. BUB is a very
old cant term for drink.

~Knock-down~, or KNOCK-ME-DOWN, strong ale.

~Knocked-up~, tired, jaded, used up, done for. In the United States,
amongst females, the phrase is equivalent to being _enceinte_, so that
Englishmen often unconsciously commit themselves when amongst our Yankee
cousins.

~Knock-’em-downs~, the game of skittles.

~Knocker~, “up to the KNOCKER,” means finely or showily dressed, in the
height of fashion; proficient, equal to the task.

~Knocker-face~, an ugly face, _i.e._, like an old-fashioned
door-knocker.

~Knock-in~, the game of loo.

~Knocking-in~, coming into college after time. A habit of KNOCKING-IN
late generally leads to some unpleasantness.—_Oxford University._

~Knocking-out.~ All visitors, on leaving a college after time, have to
state in whose rooms they have been, that his gate-bill may be scored up
for them. When a rackety party takes place, the visitors, or “out
college men,” are generally supplied with a list of the names of the
quietest men in college, so that the whereabouts of the party may not be
betrayed.—_Oxford University._

~Knock-it-down~, to show, in the “free and easy” style, approval of a
song or toast, by hammering with pot or glass on the table.

~Knock off~, to give over, or abandon. A saying used by workmen in
reference to dinner or other meal times, for upwards of two centuries.

~Knock out~, in racing parlance, to drive out of the quotations; as a
KNOCKED-OUT favourite. Also to make bankrupt; as a KNOCKED-OUT backer or
bookmaker. When a man cannot meet his engagements on the turf, he is
said to be KNOCKED OUT.

~Knock-outs~, or KNOCK-INS, disreputable persons who visit auction rooms
and unite to purchase the articles at their own prices. One of their
number is instructed to buy for the rest, and after a few small bids as
blinds to the auctioneer and bystanders, the lot is knocked down to the
KNOCK-OUT bidders, at a nominal price—the competition to result from an
auction being thus frustrated and set aside. At the conclusion of the
sale the goods are paid for, and carried to a neighbouring public-house,
where they are re-sold or KNOCKED-OUT among the confederates, and the
difference between the first purchase and the second—or tap-room
KNOCK-OUT—is divided amongst the gang. As generally happens with
ill-gotten gains, the money soon finds its way to the landlord’s pocket,
and the KNOCK-OUT is rewarded with a red nose and a bloated face.
Cunning tradesmen join the KNOCK-OUTS when an opportunity for
money-making presents itself. The lowest description of KNOCK-OUTS,
fellows with more tongue than capital, are termed BABES. Within the past
few years a few respectable auctioneers, assisted much by one or two
just and admirable magisterial decisions, have succeeded in considerably
limiting the efforts of the KNOCK-OUT fraternity.

~Knock-under~, to submit.

~Knowing~, sharp, shrewd, artful; “a KNOWING codger,” or “a KNOWING
blade,” one who can take you in, or cheat you, in any transaction you
may have with him. It implies also deep cunning and foresight, and
generally signifies dishonesty.

    “Who, on a spree with black-eyed Sal, his blowen,
    So swell, so prime, so nutty, and so KNOWING?”—_Don Juan._

KNOW, in this sense, enters into several slang phrases. “I KNOW
something,” expresses that I am not to be taken in by any shallow
device. “He KNOWS a thing or two,” _i.e._, he is a cunning fellow.

~Knowledge-box~, the head.—_Pugilistic._

~Knuckle~, to fight with fists, to pommel.

~Knuckle-duster~, a large, heavy, or over-gaudy ring; a ring which
attracts attention from its size.

~Knuckle-duster~, an iron or brass instrument which covers the knuckles
so as to protect them from injury when striking a blow, adding force to
it at the same time. Sometimes a KNUCKLE-DUSTER has knobs or points
projecting, so as to mutilate and disfigure the person struck. This
brutal invention is American, but has been made familiar here.

~Knuckle to~, or KNUCKLE UNDER, to yield or submit.

~Knuller~, old term for a chimney-sweep, who solicited jobs by ringing a
bell. From the _Saxon_, CNYLLAN, to knell, or sound a bell. _See_
QUERIER.

~Kootee~, a house.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Kotoo~, to bow down before, to cringe, to flatter. From a Chinese
ceremony.

~Kubber~, news.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Kudos~, praise; KUDIZED, praised. _Greek_, κύδος.—_University._

~Kye~, eighteenpence.

~Kypsey~, a basket. A term generally used by gipsies.

~La!~ a euphuistic rendering of LORD! common amongst females and very
precise persons; imagined by many to be a corruption of LOOK! but this
is a mistake. Sometimes pronounced LAW, or LAWKS.

~Lac~, one hundred thousand.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Laced~, strengthened with ardent spirits. Tea or coffee in which brandy
is poured is said to be LACED.

~Lacing~, a beating. From the phrase, “I’ll lace your
jacket.”—_L’Estrange._ Perhaps to give a beating with a lace or lash.
Perhaps, also, a figurative phrase for ornamenting the article in
question with stripes.

~Ladder~, “can’t see a hole in a LADDER,” said of any one who is
intoxicated. It was once said that a man was never properly drunk until
he could not lie down without holding, could not see a hole through a
LADDER, or went to the pump to light his pipe.

~Ladies’ mile~, that part of Hyde Park where the feminine beauty, rank,
and fashion most do congregate during the airing hours of the London
season.

~Lag~, a returned transport, or ticket-of-leave convict.

~Lag~, to void urine.—_Ancient Cant._ In modern slang to transport, as
regards bearing witness, and not in reference to the action of judge or
jury.

~Lagged~, imprisoned, apprehended, or transported for a crime. From the
Old Norse, LAGDA, “laid,”—laid by the leg.

~Lagger~, a sailor. Also, one who gives evidence; an informer.

~Lagging gage~, a chamber-pot.—_Ancient Cant._

~Lambasting~, a beating. Perhaps LUMB-BASTING, from the lumbar-regions.

~Lamb’s wool~, spiced ale, of which the butler at Brasenose every Shrove
Tuesday supplies as much as is required at Hall, with a copy of verses
on the subject, generally written by a Brasenose man. One of these poems
began:—

    Antiquum et vetus est {Ale Æn Nas} dicere laudes.
                          {alienas   }

        _Oxford University._

LAMB’S WOOL is also a hot drink, well known to the community for
centuries. Supposed by some to be derived from Lammas, at which time it
was drunk, and by others to be derived from the similarity between the
foam of the drink and the white wool obtained from lambs.

~Lame duck~, a stockjobber who speculates beyond his capital, and cannot
pay his losses. Upon retiring from the Exchange he is said to “waddle
out of the Alley.”

~Lamming~, a beating.—_Old English_, LAM; used by Beaumont and
Fletcher. Not as Sir Walter Scott supposed, from one Dr. Lamb, but from
the _Old Norse_, LAM, the hand; also, _Gaelic_.

~Lammy~, a blanket.

~Land-lubber~, sea term for “a landsman.” _See_ LOAFER.

~Land-shark~, a sailor’s definition of a lawyer.

~Lane~, a familiar term for Drury Lane Theatre, just as Covent Garden
Theatre is constantly spoken of as “the Garden.”

~Lap~, liquor, drink. LAP is the term invariably used in the ballet
girls’ dressing-room for gin.

~Lap~, one circuit of a pedestrian enclosure. In running a race of any
distance one man is said to LAP another when he is one entire circuit in
front.

~Lap.~ LAP THE GUTTER, to get beastly and helplessly drunk. LAP means to
drink. LAP THE GATTER, to drink up the beer; a “rare LAPPER,” a hard
drinker.

~Lark~, a frolic, a joke; “let’s have a jolly good LARK,” let us have a
piece of fun.—_Anglo-Saxon_, LAC, sport; but more probably from the
nautical term SKYLARKING, _i.e._, mounting to the highest yards and
sliding down the ropes for amusement, which is allowed on certain
occasions.

~Lark~, to sport boisterously, to show a disposition for “going on the
spree.”

~Larrence~, an imaginary being, supposed by the Scottish peasantry to
have power over indolent persons. Hence laziness is often called
LARRENCE.

~Larrup~, to beat or thrash.

~Larruping~, a good beating or hiding.—_Irish._

~Lashins~, large quantities; as, “LASHINS of whisky.” An Irishism in
common use.

~Latchpan~, the lower lip—properly a dripping-pan; “to hang one’s
LATCHPAN,” to pout, be sulky.—_Norfolk._

~Lavender~, “to be laid up in LAVENDER;” to be in pawn; to be out of the
way for an especial purpose. From the practice among housewives of
placing LAVENDER in drawers in which linen and clothes are to be kept
for any period.

~Law~, “to give LAW to an animal” is a sporting term signifying to give
the hare or stag a chance of escaping, by not setting on the hounds till
the quarry has run some distance. Also, used for giving any one a chance
of succeeding in a difficult undertaking by allowing him so much grace
or preliminary notice.

~Lay~, a pursuit or practice, a dodge. Term in this sense much used by
thieves.

~Lay~, in wagering, to bet against a man or animal. Betters are divided
in racing slang into layers and takers; they are otherwise known as
bookmakers and backers.

~Lay~, some, a piece. “Tip me a LAY of pannum,” _i.e._, give me a slice
of bread.—_North._

~Lay~, to watch; “on the LAY,” on the look-out.—_Shakspeare._

~Lay down the knife and fork~, to die. Compare PEGGING-OUT, HOPPING THE
TWIG, and similar flippancies.

~Lead~, or FRIENDLY LEAD, a gathering at a low public-house, for the
purpose of assisting some one who is “in trouble” (in these cases
trouble always means imprisonment), who has just “come out of trouble,”
or who is in want of a “mouthpiece.” A LEAD is different from a raffle,
inasmuch as no article is put up or thrown for, but in the course of the
evening some friend of the troubled one LEADS OFF by putting a certain
sum in a plate, and the remainder of the party follow the LEAD with
whatever they can spare. Sometimes people pay as they enter the room,
but this does not alter the title or character of the meeting. In every
other respect a LEAD is similar to a raffle; songs, dances, drinking,
and a general desire to increase the bastardy averages being the most
conspicuous features of the entertainment. Irish LEADS and raffles are
characterized by less vice and more quarrelling than those of the lower
orders of English people.

~Leary~, flash, knowing, artful, sly.

~Leary bloke~, a clever or artful person.

~Leather~, to beat or thrash. Probably from allusion to the skin, which
is often called LEATHER. Some think the term is from the LEATHER belts
worn by soldiers, which are often used as weapons in street rows. Most
likely from there being “nothing like LEATHER” with which to administer
a thrashing.

~Leathern conveniency~, a carriage. A Quaker being reprimanded by the
Society of Friends for keeping a carriage, “contrary to the ancient
testimonies,” said, “it is not a carriage I keep, but merely a
LEATHERN-CONVENIENCY.” _See_ under SIMON PURE, in the Introduction.

~Leaving shop~, or DOLLY SHOP, an unlicensed house where goods are taken
into pawn at exorbitant rates of interest.

~Led captain~, a fashionable spunger, a “swell” who by artifice
ingratiates himself into the favours of the master of the house, and
lives at his table. Probably from the fact that a real captain leads,
but that a sham one is led—to the dinner-table.

~Leer~, empty.—_Oxfordshire._ Pure _German_, as is nearly so the next
word.

~Leer~, print, newspaper. _German_, LEHREN, to instruct; hence _Old
English_, LERE, “spelt in the LEER.” _See_ SPELL.—_Old Cant._

~Leg~, a part of a game. In some old games there are so many LEGS to the
chalk, and so many chalks to the game. Sometimes the LEGS are called
chalks, and the chalks LEGS—one word is as good as another, provided an
agreement is made beforehand.

~Leg~, or BLACKLEG, a disreputable sporting character and racecourse
_habitué_; that is, one who is disreputable among sporting men.

~Leg-and-leg~, the state of a game when each player has won a LEG. In
Ireland a LEG is termed a horse, LEG-AND-LEG being there termed
“horse-and-horse.”

~Leg bail~, the bail or security given by absence. To give LEG BAIL is
to run away.

~Leg it~, to run; “to give a LEG,” to assist, as when one mounts a
horse; “making a LEG,” a countryman’s bow,—projecting the LEG from
behind as a balance to the head bent forward.—_Shakspeare._

~Leg-of-mutton~, humorous street term for a sheep’s trotter, or foot.

~Leg of mutton fist~, a large, muscular or bony hand.

~Length~, forty-two lines of a dramatic composition.—_Theatrical._

~Length~, six months’ imprisonment. _See_ STRETCH.

~Let alone~, an expression which signifies “much less” as used in
comparative statement or argument. “I cannot afford five shillings, LET
ALONE five pounds.” Barham, in one of the Ingoldsby Legends, says:—

    “I have not had, this livelong day, one drop to cheer my heart,
    Nor brown to buy a bit of bread with—LET ALONE a tart.”

~Let drive~, to strike at, or attack with vigour.

~Let in~, to cheat or victimize. “He let me in heavily.”

~Let on~, to give an intimation of having some knowledge of a subject.
Ramsay employs the phrase in the _Gentle Shepherd_. Common in Scotland.

~Let the cat out~, or LET THE CAT OUT OF THE BAG, a common phrase, which
implies that a secret is to be or has been let out.

~Letty~, a bed. _Italian_, LETTO.—_Lingua Franca._

~Levanter~, a card-sharper, or defaulting gambler. It was formerly the
custom to give out to the creditors, when a person was in pecuniary
difficulties, and it was convenient for him to keep away, that he was
gone to the East, or the LEVANT; hence, when one loses a bet, and
decamps without settling, he is said to LEVANT. The LEVANT was also a
notorious place for queer customers, who would do anything rather than
pay. Its reputation is not particularly odorous even now.

~Levy~, a shilling.—_Liverpool._ Among labourers a LEVY is a sum
obtained before it is due, something to keep a man going till
Saturday-night comes, or his task is finished.

~Liberty~, ground let in parts of Yorkshire for shooting purposes.

~Lick~, a blow; LICKING, a beating; “to put in big LICKS,” a curious and
common phrase, meaning that great exertions are being made.—_Dryden_;
_North_.

~Lick~, to excel, or overcome; “if you ain’t sharp, he’ll LICK you,”
_i.e._, be finished first. Signifies, also, to whip, chastise, or
conquer. _Ancient cant_, LYCKE. _Welsh_, LLACHIO, to strike.

~Lickspittle~, a coarse but singularly expressive term for a parasite,
who puts up with indignities for the sake of advantages.

~Lifer~, a convict who is sentenced to imprisonment for life.

~Lift~, to steal, pick pockets; “there’s a clock been LIFTED,” said when
a watch has been stolen. The word is as old as the Border forays, and is
used by Shakspeare. SHOPLIFTER is a recognised term. _Old Gothic_,
LLIFAN, to steal; _Lower Rhenish_, LÖFTEN.

~Lig~, a lie, a falsehood.—_Lancashire._ In old ballads the word “lie”
is often spelt “LIG.” In old Saxon, LIG is to lie, but to lie as in a
bed.

~Light~, credit, trust; “to get a LIGHT at a house” is to get credit.
When a man’s credit is stopped, his LIGHT is said to be put out. LIGHT
also means life. “I’ll put your LIGHT out” is a murderous threat.

~Light Bob~, a light infantry soldier.—_Military._

~Light Feeder~, a silver spoon.

~Lightning~, gin; “flash o’ LIGHTNING,” a glass of gin.

~Lights~, a worthless piece of meat; applied metaphorically to a fool, a
soft or stupid person.

~Lights~, the eyes. Also, the lungs; animals’ lungs are always so
called.

~Lil~, a book, generally a pocket-book.—_Gipsy._

~Lily Benjamin~, a great white coat. _See_ BENJAMIN.

~Limb~, a troublesome or precocious child.

~Limb of the law~, a lawyer, or clerk articled to that profession.

~Limbo~, a prison, from LIMBUS or LIMBUS PATRUM, a mediæval theological
term for purgatory. The Catholic Church teaches that LIMBO was that part
of hell where holy people who died before the Redemption were kept.

~Line~, a hoax, a fool-trap; as, “to get him in a LINE,” _i.e._, to get
some sport out of him.

~Line~, calling, trade, profession; “what LINE are you in?” “the
building LINE.”

~Liner~, a casual reporter, paid by the line. Diminutive of
“penny-a-liner.”

~Lingo~, talk, or language. Slang is termed LINGO amongst the lower
orders. _Italian_, LINGUA.—_Lingua Franca._

~Lint-scraper~, a young surgeon. Thackeray, in _Lovel the Widower_,
uses the phrase, and gives, also, the words “Æsculapius,”
“Pestle-grinder,” and “Vaccinator,” for the same character.

~Lionesses~, ladies visiting an Oxford man, especially at
“Commemoration,” which is the chief time for receiving feminine visitors
at the University.

~Lion-hunter~, one who hunts up, and has a devout veneration for, small
celebrities. Mrs. Leo Hunter, in _Pickwick_, is a splendid specimen of
this unpleasant creature.

~Lionize~, to make much of any visitor with small or moderate claims to
distinction; to conduct a stranger round the principal objects of
attraction in a place; to act as cicerone.

~Lions~, notabilities, either persons or sights worthy of inspection; an
expression dating from the times when the royal lions at the Tower,
before the existence of Zoological Gardens and travelling menageries,
were a London wonder, to visit which country cousins and strangers of
eminence were constantly taken. Visitors taken round at Cambridge to see
the sights are, or were, called LIONS. The origin of the Tower
collection was the three leopards sent by the Emperor Frederic to Henry
III., as a living illustration of the royal arms of England. In the roll
of John de Cravebeadell, constable of the Tower (_B. M. Top.
Collections_, iii. p. 153), is a charge of 3_d._ per day “in support of
the leopard of our lord the king.” Edward III., when Prince of Wales,
appears to have taken great interest in the animals; and after he became
king, there was not only the old leopard, but “one lion, one lioness,
and two cat-lions,” says Stowe, “in the said Tower, committed to the
custody of Robert, son of John Bowre.” The menagerie was only abolished
in 1834; and the practice was to allow any person to enter gratis who
brought with him a little dog to be thrown to the lions!—_Dr. Doran’s
Princes of Wales._

~Lip~, talk, bounce, impudence; “come, none o’ yer LIP!”

~Lip~, to sing; “LIP us a chant,” sing a song.

~Liquor~, or LIQUOR UP, to drink drams.—_Americanism._ In LIQUOR,
tipsy, or drunk.

~Little go~, the old term for the examination now called SMALLS.

~Little snakes-man~, a little thief, who is generally passed through a
small aperture to open a door and let in the rest of the gang.

~Liverpool Irishman~, any man born in Liverpool of Irish parents. See
IRISH COCKNEY.

~Liverpudlian~, a native of Liverpool.

~Live-stock~, vermin of the insect kind, especially of that more than
usually unpleasant kind found on tramps, &c.

~Loafer~, a lazy vagabond. Generally considered an Americanism. LOPER,
or LOAFER, however, was in general use as a cant term in the early part
of the last century. LANDLOPER was a vagabond who begged in the attire
of a sailor; and the sea-phrase, LAND-LUBBER, was doubtless synonymous.

~Loaver~, money. _See_ LOUR.—_Lingua Franca._

~Lob~, a till, or money-drawer.

~Lob-sneaking~, stealing money from tills; occasionally stealing tills
and all.

~Lobb~, the head.—_Pugilistic._

~Loblolly~, gruel.—_Old_: used by Markham as a sea-term for grit gruel,
or hasty pudding.

~Loblolly boy~, a derisive term for a surgeon’s mate in the navy.

    “LOB-LOLLY-BOY is a person who on board of a man-of-war attends the
    surgeon and his mates, and one who knows just as much of the
    business of a seaman as the author of this poem.”—_The Patent, a
    Poem_, 4to, 1776.

~Lobs!~ schoolboys’ signal on the master’s approach. Also, an assistant
watcher, an under gamekeeper.

~Lobs~, words, talk.—_Gipsy._

~Lobscouse~, a dish made of potatoes, meat, and biscuits, boiled
together.

~Lobster~, a soldier. A policeman, from the colour of his coat, is
styled an unboiled, or raw LOBSTER.

~Lobster-box~, a barrack, or military station.

~Loggerheads~, “to come to LOGGERHEADS,” to come to blows.

~Logie~, theatrical jewellery, made mostly of tin.

~Loll~, to lie about lazily. “He would LOLL upon the handle of the
door,” said of an incorrigibly lazy fellow.

~Lolly~, the head. _See_ LOBB.—_Pugilistic._

~London ordinary~, the beach at Brighton, where the
“eight-hours-at-the-sea-side” excursionists dine in the open-air.

~Long-bow.~ _See_ DRAW THE LONG BOW.

~Long firm~, a gang of swindlers who obtain goods by false pretences.
They generally advertise or answer advertisements. The word LONG is
supposed to be from a playful allusion made by one of the firm to the
length of their credit.

~Long-ghost~, a tall, thin, awkward person. Sometimes called
“lamp-post.”

~Long-headed~, far-seeing, clever, calculating.

~Long-hundred~, a Billingsgate expression for 120 fresh herrings, or
other small fish, the long-hundred being six score.

~Long-odds~, the odds which denote that the man or animal laid against
has, or is supposed to have, little or no chance.

~Long-shore butcher~, a coast-guardsman.—_Sea._ All people who get
their livings by the side of the Thames below bridge are called
LONG-SHORE folk.

~Long-tailed beggar~, a cat. The tale that hangs thereby runs thus:—A
boy, during his first very short voyage to sea, had become so entirely a
seaman, that on his return he had forgotten the name of the cat, and was
obliged, pointing to puss, to ask his mother “what she called that ’ere
LONG-TAILED BEGGAR?” Accordingly, sailors, when they hear a freshwater
tar discoursing too largely on nautical matters, are very apt to say,
“But how, mate, about that ’ere LONG-TAILED BEGGAR?”

~Long-tailed-one~, a bank-note or “flimsy” for a large amount.

~Long-tails~, among shooters, are pheasants; among coursers and
dog-fanciers they are greyhounds.

~Longs~, the latrine at Brasenose, so called because built by LADY
LONG.—_Oxford University._

~Longs-and-shorts~, cards made for cheating.

~Looking-glass~, a facetious synonym for a _pot de chambre_. This is
very old. The term arose from the fact that in ancient times this
utensil was the object of very frequent examination by the medical
fraternity. There is an old story of a lady who called at an inn, and
called for a LOOKING-GLASS to arrange her hair, and who was presented
with a chamber utensil.

~Loony~, a silly fellow, a natural. Corruption of LOONEY TICK (lunatic).
Sometimes corrupted to LOOBY.

~Loose.~ _See_ ON THE LOOSE.

~Loose-box~, a brougham or other vehicle kept for the use of a _dame de
compagnie_. A more vulgar appellation is “mot-cart,” the contemptuous
sobriquet applied by the envious mob to a one-horse covered carriage.

~Loose-box~, a stable in which a horse is not tethered, but remains
loose.

~Loot~, swag or plunder; also used as a verb. The word came much into
vogue during the latest Chinese campaign.

~Lope~, this old form of leap is often heard in the streets. To LOPE is
also to steal. _German_, LAUFEN.

~Lop-sided~, uneven, one side larger than the other. _See Jacob
Faithful._

~Lord~, a humpbacked man. _See_ MY LORD.

~Lord~, “drunk as a LORD,” a common saying, probably referring to the
facilities a man of fortune has for such a gratification; perhaps a sly
sarcasm at the supposed habits of the aristocracy. This phrase had its
origin in the old hard drinking days, when it was almost compulsory on a
man of fashion to get drunk regularly after dinner.

~Lord-mayor’s-fool~, an imaginary personage who likes everything that is
good, and plenty of it.

~Lothario~, a “gay” deceiver; generally a heartless, brainless villain.

~Loud~, flashy, showy, as applied to dress or manner. _See_ BAGS.

~Lour~, or LOWR, money; “gammy LOWR,” bad money. From the Wallachian
Gipsy word, LOWE, coined money. Possibly connected with the French,
LOUER, to hire.—_Ancient Cant_ and _Gipsy_.

~Louse-trap~, a small-tooth comb.—_Old Cant._ _See_ CATCH-’EM-ALIVE.

~Love~, at billiards, rackets, and many other games, nothing: five
points to none would be “five LOVE,”—a LOVE game being when one player
does not score at all. The term is also used at whist, “six LOVE,” “four
LOVE,” when one side has marked up six, four, or any other number, and
the other none. A writer in the _Gentleman’s Magazine_ for July, 1780,
derives it either from LUFF, an old Scotch word for the hand, or from
the _Dutch_, LOEF, the LOOF, weather-gauge (_Sewell’s Dutch Dictionary_,
4to, 1754); but it more probably, from the sense of the following,
denotes something done without reciprocity.

~Love~, “to do a thing for LOVE,” _i.e._, for nothing. A man is said to
marry for LOVE when he gets nothing with his wife; and an Irishman, with
the bitterest animosity against his antagonist, will fight him for LOVE,
_i.e._, for the mere satisfaction of beating him, and not for a stake.

~Loveage~, tap droppings, a mixture of stale spirits, sweetened and sold
to habitual dram-drinkers, principally females. Called also “alls.”

~Low-water~, but little money in pocket, when the finances are at a low
ebb.

~Lubber~, a clown, or fool.—_Ancient Cant_, LUBBARE. Among seamen an
awkward fellow, a landsman.

~Lubber’s hole~, an aperture in the maintop of a ship, by which a timid
climber may avoid the difficulties of the “futtock shrouds;” hence as a
sea-term the LUBBER’S HOLE represents any cowardly way of evading duty.

~Luck~, “down on one’s LUCK,” wanting money, or in difficulty.

~Lucky~, “to cut one’s LUCKY,” to go away quickly. _See_ STRIKE.

~Ludlam’s dog.~ An indolent, inactive person is often said to be “as
lazy as LUDLAM’S DOG, which leaned its head against the wall to bark.”
Sailors say “as lazy as Joe the Marine, who laid down his musket to
sneeze.”

~Lug~, “my togs are in LUG,” _i.e._, in pawn.

~Lug~, to pull, or slake thirst.—_Old._

~Lug chovey~, a pawnbroker’s shop.

~Luke~, nothing.—_North Country Cant._

~Lully~, a shirt.

~Lully prigger~, a rogue who steals wet clothes hung on lines to dry.

~Lumber~, to pawn or pledge. Probably from LOMBARD.

~Lumbered~, pawned; sometimes imprisoned.

~Lummy~, jolly, first-rate.

~Lump~, anything exceptionally large, “as a LUMP of a man,” “a great
LUMP of a fellow,” &c.

~Lump~, the workhouse; also called the Pan.

~Lump it~, to dislike it; “if you don’t like it, you may LUMP IT;”
sometimes varied to, “if you don’t like it, you may do the other thing.”
Probably from the fact that, in bulk or in lump, the good has to be
taken with the bad. What you don’t like must be reckoned with the LUMP.
To LUMP IT is also to take off at a draught, as medicine or a dram. “He
LUMPED IT down at once.”

~Lump the lighter~, to be transported.

~Lump work~, work contracted for, or taken by the LUMP.

~Lumper~, a contractor. On the river more especially a person who
contracts to deliver a ship laden with timber.

~Lumper~, a low thief who haunts wharves and docks, and robs vessels,
also a person who sells old goods as new.

~Lumpy~, intoxicated. Also used to signify _enceinte_.

~Lunan~, a girl.—_Gipsy._

~Lurch~, a term at the game of cribbage. A is said to LURCH B when the
former attains the end, or sixty-first hole, of the board before the
latter has pegged his thirty-first hole; or, in more familiar words,
before B has turned the corner. A LURCH sometimes, and then only by
agreement, counts as a double game or rub.

~Lurk~, a sham, swindle, or representation of feigned distress. An
imposition of any kind is a LURK.

~Lurker~, an impostor who travels the country with false certificates of
fires, shipwrecks, &c. Also, termed a SILVER BEGGAR, which _see_.

~Lush~, intoxicating drinks of all kinds, but generally used for beer.
It is generally allowed, as has been stated, that LUSH and its
derivatives claim Lushington, the brewer, as sponsor.

~Lush~, to drink, or get drunk.

~Lush-crib~, a public-house.

~Lushington~, a drunkard, or one who continually soaks himself with
lush. Some years since there was a LUSHINGTON CLUB in Bow Street, Covent
Garden.

~Lushy~, intoxicated. Johnson says, “opposite to pale,” so red with
drink. He must, however, have been wrong, as the foregoing derivation
shows.

~Lylo~, come hither.—_Anglo-Chinese._

~Lynch-law~, summary punishment. From an American judge famous for
hanging first and trying afterwards.

~Mab~, a cab, or hackney-coach.

~Mace~, to sponge, swindle, or beg, in a polite way: “give it him (a
shopkeeper) on the MACE,” _i.e._, obtain goods on credit and never pay
for them; also termed “striking the MACE.”

~Mace~, to welsh, to obtain money without any expectation of being able
to pay or intention of paying.

~Maceman~, or MACER, a welcher, magsman, or general swindler; a
“street-mugger.”

~Madza~, half. _Italian_, MEZZA. This word enters into combination with
various cant phrases, mainly taken from the _Lingua Franca_, as MADZA
CAROON, half-a-crown, two-and-sixpence; MADZA SALTEE, a halfpenny [_see_
SALTEE]; MADZA POONA, half-a-sovereign; MADZA ROUND THE BULL, half a
pound of steak, &c. This word is, in street phraseology, invariably
pronounced MEDZER.

~Mag~, a halfpenny.—_Ancient Cant_, MAKE. MEGS were formerly
guineas.—_B. M. Carew._ MAKE, the old form, is still used by schoolboys
in Scotland. “Not a blessed MAG!” would be the phrase of a cadger down
on his luck to express his penniless state.

~Mag~, literary and printers’ slang for magazine.

~Mag~, to talk; hence MAGPIE. To MAG in thieves’ slang is to talk well
and persuasively.

~Maggoty~, fanciful, fidgety. Whims and fancies were formerly termed
MAGGOTS, from the popular belief that a maggot in the brain was the
cause of any odd notion or caprice a person might exhibit. Deer are
sometimes found to have maggots in their brains, which, perhaps,
accounts for the origin of the term.

~Magsman~, a street swindler, who watches for countrymen and “gullible”
persons, and persuades them out of their possessions. MAGSMEN are
wonderful actors. Their work is done in broad daylight, without any
stage accessories; and often a wink, a look, or a slip of the tongue
would betray their confederacy. Their ability and perseverance are truly
worthy of a better cause. MAGSMEN are very often men of superior
education. Those who “work” the tidal trains and boats are often
faultlessly dressed and highly accomplished.

~Mahcheen~, a merchant. Chinese pronunciation of the English
word.—_Anglo-Chinese._

~Mahogany~, “to have one’s feet under another man’s MAHOGANY,” to sit at
his table, be supported on other than one’s own resources; “amputate
your MAHOGANY,” _i.e._, go away, elaboration of “cut your stick.”

~Mahogany flat~, a bug.

~Mail~, to post a letter; “this screeve is mailed by a sure hand.”

~Main-toby~, the highway, or the main road. _See_ TOBY.

~Make~, any one is said to be “on the MAKE” who asks too high a price
for his goods, or endeavours in any way to overreach.

~Make~, to steal, a successful theft or swindle. A man on the look-out
for swindling opportunities is said to be “on the MAKE.”

~Make tracks~, an Americanism synonymous with skedaddle; to make oneself
scarce.

~Make-up~, personal appearance.—_Theatrical._

~Makings~, materials. A man is often said to have the MAKINGS of a good
politician (or whatever he may aspire to be) in him, if they were but
properly applied.

~Malapropism~, an ignorant, vulgar misapplication of language, so named
from Mrs. Malaprop, a character in Sheridan’s famous comedy of the
_Rivals_. Mrs. Partington afterwards succeeded to the mantle of Mrs.
Malaprop; but the phrase Partingtonism is as yet uncoined, for the
simple reason that Mrs. Malaprop was the original, Mrs. Partington the
imitation.

~Malley~, a gardener.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Manablins~, broken victuals.

~Man a-hanging~, a man in difficulties. _See_ HANGING.

~Mandozy~, a term of endearment among East-end Jews; probably from the
valiant fighter named Mendoza.

~Mang~, to talk.—_Scotch._

~Man-handle~, to use a person roughly, as to take him prisoner, turn him
out of a room, or give him a beating.

~Man in the moon~, the gentleman who is supposed to find the “pieces” to
pay election expenditure and electors’ expenses, so long as the latter
vote his way. _See_ ELECTION INQUIRIES.

~Marbles~, furniture, movables; “money and MARBLES,” cash and personal
effects.

~Marchioness~, a little, dirty, old-fashioned maid-of-all-work; a title
now in regular use, but derived from the remarkable character in the
_Old Curiosity Shop_.

~Mare’s nest~, a supposed discovery of marvels, which turn out no
marvels at all; from a story similar to that about the cock neighing.
Three Cockneys, out ruralizing, had determined to find out something
about nests. Accordingly, when they ultimately came upon a dungheap,
they judged by the signs therein that it must be a MARE’S NEST,
especially as they could see the mare close handy. An old preacher in
Cornwall up to very lately employed a different simile, as, “It’s like a
cow calving up in a tree.”

~Marine~, or MARINE RECRUIT, an empty bottle. This expression having
once been used in the presence of an officer of marines, he was at first
inclined to take it as an insult, until some one adroitly appeased his
wrath by remarking that no offence could be meant, as all that it could
possibly imply was, “one who had done his duty, and was ready to do it
again.”

~Mark~, to make one’s MARK is to achieve a success literary, artistic,
or otherwise. Men of eminence are said to leave their MARKS on the
earth’s surface. An American poet has described this ambitious, albeit
somewhat rare, proceeding as leaving “footprints on the sands of time.”

~Marketeer~, a betting man who devotes himself, by means of special
information, to the study of favourites, and the diseases incident to
that condition of equine life. The MARKETEER is the principal agent in
all milking and knocking-out arrangements.

~Market-horse~, a horse simply kept in the betting-lists for the purpose
of being betted against.

~Marplot~, an officious bungler, who spoils everything he interferes
with.

~Marriage lines~, a marriage certificate.—_Provincial._

~Marrow~, a mate, a fellow-workman, a pitman who works in a “shift” with
another.—_Northumberland and Durham._

~Marrow-bones~, the knees; “I’ll bring him down upon his MARROW BONES,”
_i.e._, I’ll make him bend his knees as he does to the Virgin Mary.
Supposed to be from Mary Bones, an objectionable term used by the first
Protestants in reference to the supposed adoration of the Virgin Mary by
Catholics.

~Marrowskying.~ _See_ MEDICAL GREEK.

~Marry~, a very old term of asseveration, originally (in Popish times) a
mode of swearing by the Virgin Mary; _q.d._, by Mary.

~Martingale~, a gambling term, which means the doubling of a stake every
time you lose; so that when you win once you win back all that you have
lost. So called from the fact that, as in all fair games you must win
once, you have a safe hold of fortune. The difficulty is to obtain a
bank large enough to do this effectively, or having the bank to find any
one who will follow you far enough, in a fair game.

~Mary Ann~, the title of the dea ex machinâ evolved from trades-unionism
at Sheffield, to the utter destruction of recalcitrant grinders. She is
supposed to do all the “blow-ups,” steal all the bands, and otherwise
terrorize over victims of the union.

~Marygold~, one million sterling. _See_ PLUM.

~Maskee~, never mind, no consequence.—_Anglo-Chinese._

~Massacre of the innocents~, when the leader of the House of Commons
goes through the doleful operation of devoting to extinction a number of
useful measures at the end of the session, for want of time to pass
them. _Vide Times_, 20th July, 1859: Mr. C. Foster, on altering the time
of the legislative sessions.—_Parliamentary Slang._

~Master of the Mint~, a gardener.

~Master of the Rolls~, a baker.

~Mate~, the term a coster or low person applies to a friend, partner, or
companion; “me and my MATE did so and so,” is a common phrase with a low
Londoner. Originally a _sea term_.

~Matey~, a labourer in one of Her Majesty’s dockyards. Common
elaboration of the word MATE.

~Maudlin~, Magdalen College, Oxford. This is the old English
pronunciation of the word.

~Mauley~, a fist, that with which one strikes as with a
mall.—_Pugilistic._

~Mauley~, a signature, from MAULEY, a fist; “put your fist to it,” is
sometimes said by a tradesman when desiring a fellow-trader to put his
signature to a bill or note.

~Maund~, to beg; “MAUNDERING on the fly,” begging of people in the
streets.—_Old Cant._ MAUNG, to beg, is a term in use amongst the
gipsies, and may also be found in the Hindoo vocabulary. MAUND, however,
is pure Anglo-Saxon, from MAND, a basket. Compare BEG, which is derived
from BAG—a curious parallel.

~Maw~, the mouth; “hold your MAW,” cease talking.

~Mawworm~, a hypocrite of the most unpleasant kind. From Bickerstaff’s
play of _The Hypocrite_. Originally a MAWWORM was a worm in the
stomach, the thread worm.

~Max~, gin; MAX upon tick, gin obtained upon credit.

~Mazarine~, the platform beneath the stage in large theatres. Probably
corruption of _Italian_, MEZZANINO.

~M. B. coat~, (_i.e._, Mark of the Beast,) a name given to the long
surtout worn by some of the clergy,—a modern Puritan form of abuse,
said to have been accidentally disclosed to a High Church customer by a
tailor’s orders to his foreman.

~Mealy-mouthed~, soft-spoken, plausible, deceitful. A specious liar is
said to be MEALY-MOUTHED.

~Mean white~, a term of contempt among negroes, in the old slavery days,
for white men without landed property. A white man in the Southern
States had no _locus standi_ unless he possessed property, and the
blackest of niggers would have felt insulted at any “poor white trash”
claiming to be “a man and brother.”

~Measley~, mean, miserable-looking, “seedy;” “what a MEASLEY-looking
man!” _i.e._, what a wretched, unhappy fellow.

~Medical Greek~, the slang used by medical students at the hospitals. At
the London University they have a way of disguising English, described
by Albert Smith as the Gower Street Dialect, which consists in
transposing the initials of words, _e.g._, “poke a smipe”—smoke a pipe;
“flutter-by”—butterfly, &c. This disagreeable nonsense, which has not
even the recommendation of a little ability in its composition, is often
termed Marrowskying. _See_ GREEK, ST. GILES’S GREEK, or the “_Ægidiac_”
dialect, Language of ZIPH, &c.

~Meisensang~, a missionary, Chinese pronunciation of the English
word.—_Anglo-Chinese._

~Menagerie~, the orchestra of a theatre.—_Theatrical._

~Menavelings~, odd money remaining after the daily accounts are made up
at a railway booking-office,—usually divided among the clerks. _See_
OVERS and SHORTS.

~Men of Kent~, men born in that portion of the “garden of England” which
lies east of the Medway, as distinguished from Kentish men born the
other side. The MEN OF KENT are entitled to the benefit of the old laws
of the county, that of gavelkind particularly.

~Merkin~, a term usually applied to a woman’s privities. Originally
false hair for those parts.

~Merry Dun of Dover~, a large ship figuring in sailors’ yarns. She was
so large that when passing through the Straits of Dover her flying
jib-boom knocked down Calais steeple; while, at the same time, the fly
of her ensign swept a flock of sheep off Dover cliffs. She was so lofty
that a boy who attempted to go to her mast-head found himself a grey old
man when he reached the deck again. This yarn is founded on a story in
the Scandinavian mythology. There is also a legend among sailors of the
gallant Thunderbomb, which had “ninety-nine decks and no bottom.”

~Mesopotamia~, a name given to Eaton Square and neighbourhood when first
built. This part was also called Cubitopolis.—_Fashionable slang._

~Mess~, to interfere unduly. Costermongers refer to police supervision
as MESSING. Among sailors, a dead man is said to have lost the number of
his MESS.

~Metallician~, a racing bookmaker. Bookmakers use metallic books and
pencils.

~Middy~, abbreviation of midshipman.—_Naval._

~Midge net~, a lady’s veil.

~Mike~, an Irish hodman, or general labourer.

~Mike~, to loiter; or “lazy about.” The term probably originated in St.
Giles’s, which is thronged with Irish labourers, who rarely or never
labour (MIKE being so common a term with them as to become a generic
appellation for Irishmen), and who loiter and lean against the
public-houses in the “Dials.” It has been said that the term is Old
English, MICHE, to skulk, to loiter; Old Norse, MAK, leisure, idleness.

    “Shall the blessed sun of heaven prove a MICHER?”

        _Shakspeare’s Hen. IV._, ii. 4.

Whatever may have been its origin, there can be now no doubt that the
word is supposed to have particular reference to the habits of the Irish
MIKES, or labourers, though now and again it is borrowed in the
interests of others.

~Mild~, second-rate, inferior. _See_ DRAW IT MILD. Also feeble,
inefficient, as “a MILD attempt.” Weak young men who keep bulldogs, and
dress in a “loud” stable style, from a belief that it is very becoming,
are sometimes called “MILD bloaters.”

~Milk~, a term used in connexion with racing; when a horse is entered in
a race for which his owner does not intend him to run, or at all events
in which he does not intend him to win, and bets against him, the animal
is said to “be MILKED.” MILKING, is keeping a horse a favourite, at
short odds, for a race in which he has no chance whatever, or in which
he will not be allowed to try, for the purpose of laying against him.

~Milky ones~, white linen rags.

~Mill~, a fight, or set to. _Ancient Cant_, MYLL, to rob. Probably
from the special opportunities afforded to pickpockets when the ring was
a “national institution.”

~Mill~, to fight or beat.

~Mill~, the old Insolvent Debtors’ Court. “To go through the MILL” was
equivalent to being “whitewashed.”

~Mill~, the tread-MILL.

~Miller.~ To drown the MILLER is to put too much water in anything. The
phrase was originally “to drown the MILLER’S thumb,” or go over the
specified mark, _i.e._, the thumb-mark, in adding water to ardent
spirits.

~Miller.~ “To give the MILLER” is to engage a person in conversation of
an apparently friendly character, when all at once the bystanders
surround and pelt him with flour, grease, and filth of various kinds,
flour predominating. This mode of punishing spies, informers, and other
obnoxious individuals, is used by cabmen, omnibus conductors, _et hoc
genus omne_. Eggs are useful missiles in an engagement of this
description. If rotten eggs are not obtainable, ordinary ones will do.

~Miller.~ This word is frequently called out when a person relates a
stale joke. _See_ JOE.

~Milvader~, to beat.

~Mish~, a shirt, or chemise. From COMMISSION, the ancient cant for a
shirt, afterwards shortened to K’MISH or SMISH, and then to MISH.
_French_, CHEMISE; _Italian_, CAMICIA.

    “With his snowy CAMESE and his shaggy capote.”—_Byron._

~Mitey~, a cheesemonger.

~Mitten.~ “To get the MITTEN” is, in Canadian slang, to be jilted.

~Mittens~, the boxing gloves.

~Mizzle~, a frequentative form of MIST in both senses; as applied to
weather, it is used by John Gadbury in his _Ephemeris_ in 1695—MISTY
and MIZZLING—to come down as mist; while the other sense may be
expressed as to fade away like a mist.

~Mizzle~, to run away, or decamp; to disappear as in a mist. From
MIZZLE, a drizzling rain; a Scotch mist.

    “And then one MIZZLING Michaelmas night,
    The Count he MIZZLED too.”—_Hood._

~Mizzler~, or RUM-MIZZLER, a person who is clever at effecting an
escape, or getting out of a difficulty.

~Moab~, a name applied to the turban-shaped hat which was some
few years back fashionable among ladies, and ladylike swells of
the other sex. From the Scripture phrase, “MOAB is my washpot”
(Ps. lx. 8), which latter article the hat in question was supposed
to resemble.—_University._

~Mob.~ Swift informs us, in his _Art of Polite Conversation_, that MOB
was, in his time, the slang abbreviation of “mobility,” just as NOB is
of “nobility,” at the present day. _See_ SCHOOL.

    “It is perhaps this humour of speaking no more words than we needs
    must which has so miserably curtailed some of our words, that in
    familiar writings and conversation they often lose all but their
    first syllables, as in MOB., red., pos., incog., and the
    like.”—_Addison’s Spectator._

~Mob~, a thief’s immediate companions, as,—“our own MOB;” MOBSMAN, a
dressy swindler or pickpocket.

~Mob~, to hustle, crowd round, and annoy, necessarily the action of a
large party against a smaller one, or an individual. Mobbing is
generally a concomitant of street robbery.

~Mobility~, the populace; or, according to Burke, the “great unwashed.”
Johnson calls it a cant term, although Swift notices it as a proper
expression.

~Mockered~, holey, marked unpleasantly. A ragged handkerchief and a
blotched or pitted face are both said to be MOCKERED.

~Modest quencher~, a glass of spirits and water. Dick Swiveller was fond
of a MODEST QUENCHER.

~Moey~, the mouth.—_Gipsy_ and _Hindoo_. Shakspeare has MOE, to make
mouths.

~Mofussilite~, an inhabitant of an up-country district.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Moisten your chaffer~, a slang phrase equivalent to “take something to
drink.” Also “moisten your clay,” originally applied to smokers, now
general, and supposed to have reference to the human clay.

~Moke~, a donkey.—_Gipsy_, but now general to all the lower orders. A
“coster” and his “moke” are almost inseparable terms. Probably derived
originally from the Arabic _al mocreve_, a carrier.

~Moko~, a name given by sportsmen to pheasants killed by mistake during
September, before the pheasant-shooting comes in. They pull out their
tails, and roundly assert that they are no pheasants at all, but MOKOS.

~Moll~, a girl; nickname for Mary.—_Old Cant._

~Molled~, followed, or accompanied by a woman. When a costermonger sees
a friend walking with a woman he does not know, he says on the first
opportunity afterwards, “I see yer the other night when yer was MOLLED
up and too proud to speak.”

~Mollisher~, a low girl or woman; generally a female cohabiting with a
man who gets his living by thieving.

~Mollsack~, a reticule, or market basket.

~Moll Thomson’s mark~, that is, M. T.—empty; as, “Take away this
bottle, it has MOLL THOMSON’S MARK on it.” _See_ M. T.

~Moll-tooler~, a female pickpocket.

~Mollycoddle~, an effeminate man; one who “coddles” amongst the women,
or does their work.

~Mollygrubs~, or MULLIGRUBS, stomach ache, or sorrow—which to the
costermonger is much the same, as he believes, like the ancients, that
the viscera is the seat of all feeling. Costermongers are not alone,
even in the present day, in this belief.

~Molrowing~, “out on the spree,” in company with so-called “gay women.”
In allusion to the amatory serenadings of the London cats. Another form
of this is, “out on the tiles.”

~Mondayish~, or Mondayfied, disinclined for work. “St. Monday” is a
great institution among artizans and small tradesmen.

~Monk~, a term of contempt; probably an abbreviation of MONKEY.

~Monkey~, spirit or ill temper; “to get one’s MONKEY up,” to rouse his
passion. A man is said to have his MONKEY up or the MONKEY on his back,
when he is “riled,” or out of temper; this is old, and was probably in
allusion originally to the evil spirit which was supposed to be always
present with a man; also under similar circumstances a man is said to
have his back or hump up.

~Monkey~, the instrument which drives a rocket.—_Army._

~Monkey~, 500_l._-_-Sporting Slang._

~Monkey~, the vessel in which a mess receives its full allowance of
grog.—_Sea._

~Monkey-board~, the place or step attached to an omnibus, on which the
conductor stands.

~Monkey-boat~, a peculiar, long, narrow, canal boat.

~Monkey with a long tail~, a mortgage.—_Legal._

~Monkey’s allowance~, to get blows instead of alms, more kicks than
halfpence.

~Monkery~, the country, or rural districts. Originally an old word for a
quiet or monastic life.—_Hall._

~Monniker~, a person’s name or signature.

~Month of Sundays~, an indefinite period, a long time.

~Mooch~, to sponge; to obtrude oneself upon friends just when they are
about to sit down to dinner, or other lucky time—of course quite
accidentally. Compare HULK. To slink away, and allow your friend to pay
for the entertainment. In Wiltshire, TO MOOCH is to shuffle. _See_ the
following.

~Mooching~, or ON THE MOOCH, on the look-out for any articles or
circumstances which may be turned to a profitable account; watching in
the streets for odd jobs, horses to hold, &c.; also scraps of food,
drinks, old clothes, &c.

~Moon~, a month; generally used to express the length of time a person
has been sentenced by the magistrate; thus “one MOON” is one month of
four weeks. A calendar month is known as a “callingder” or long MOON. A
“lunar MOON,” ridiculous as the phrase may seem, is of constant use
among those who affect slang of this description.

~Mooney~, intoxicated, a name for a silly fellow.

~Mooning~, loitering, wandering about in a purposeless manner.

~Moonlight~, or MOONSHINE, smuggled spirits. From the night-work of
smugglers.

~Moon-raker~, a native of Wiltshire; because it is said that some men of
that county, seeing the reflection of the moon in a pond, took it to be
a cheese, and endeavoured to pull it out with a rake.

~Moonshee~, a learned man, professor, or teacher.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Moonshine~, palaver, deception, humbug.

~Mop~, a hiring place (or fair) for servants. Steps are often “about to
be taken” to put down these assemblies, which have been proved to be
greatly detrimental to the morality of the poor. They are supposed to
contribute largely to the bastardy percentages.

~Mop~, an habitual drunkard. Also a period of intoxication. “To be on
the MOP” is to be on the drink from day to day—to be perpetually
“stale drunk.”

~Mop up~, to drink, or empty a glass.—_Old Sea term._

~Mops and brooms~, intoxicated. Supposed by an imaginative person to be
the appearance presented by the world to a very drunken man. Possibly
the term was first used to express sea-sickness.

~Mopusses~, money; “MOPUSSES ran taper,” money ran short.

~Moral~, a forthcoming result which appears certain—originally MORAL
certainty. This is racing slang, as, “The race is a MORAL for Cremorne.”
These MORALS are often, however, of very uncertain tenure.

~More-ish.~ When there is scarcely enough of an eatable or drinkable, it
is said to taste MORE-ISH; as, “This wine is very good, but it has a
slight MORE-ISH flavour.”

~Morris~, to decamp, be off. Probably from the ancient MORESCO, of
MORRIS-DANCE. _See Shakspeare._

~Mortar-board~, a square college cap.

~Mortgage-deed~, a pawnbroker’s duplicate.

~Moskeneer~, to pawn with a view to obtaining more than the actual value
of an article. There are, in various parts of the country, men who make
MOSKENEERING a profession—that is, they buy jewellery which, though
fairly good, is not so good as it seems, and pawn it as opportunity
occurs. It is notorious that some men can obtain a much larger sum
on a given article than others can; though the smallest of these
professionals generally manage to get good livings, which does not say
much for the judgment of those constant inspectors of personal
property—pawnbrokers’ assistants.

~Mot~, a girl of indifferent character. Formerly, _Mort_. _Dutch_,
MOTT-KAST, a harlotry. MOT-CART, _see_ LOOSE-BOX.

~Mouchey~, a Jew.

~Mouldy~, grey-headed. Servants wearing hair-powder are usually termed
MOULDY-PATES by street boys.

~Mouldy-grubs~, travelling showmen, mountebanks who perform in the open
air without tent or covering. Doing this is called MOULDY-GRUBBING.

~Mount~, a saddle-horse. According to quality, “a good MOUNT,” or “a bad
MOUNT.”

~Mount~, in theatrical parlance, to prepare for production on the stage.
“The piece was excellently MOUNTED.”

~Mounter~, a false swearer. Derived from the borrowed clothes men used
to MOUNT, or dress in, when going to swear for a consideration.

~Mountain-dew~, whisky, advertised as from the Highlands.

~Mountain-pecker~, a sheep’s head. _See_ JEMMY.

~Mourning~, “a full suit of MOURNING,” two black eyes; HALF-MOURNING,
one black eye.

~Mouse~, a black eye. By a façon de parler, any one with “a MOUSE” is
supposed to have been to Blackwall.

~Mouth-almighty~, a noisy, talkative person.

~Mouthpiece~, a lawyer, or counsel. Thieves and their associates always
speak of a counsel as a MOUTHPIECE.

~Move~, a “dodge,” or cunning trick; “up to a MOVE or two,” acquainted
with tricks. Probably derived from the game of chess.

~M.P.~, member of the police, one of the slang titles of the Force.

~Mrs. Grundy~, the representative of the censorious world, “What will
MRS. GRUNDY say?” Originally a character in the comedy of _Speed the
Plough_.

~Mrs. Harris~ and ~Mrs. Gamp~, nicknames of the _Morning Herald_ and
_Standard_ newspapers, while united under the proprietorship of Mr.
Baldwin. MRS. GAMP, a monthly nurse, was a character in Charles
Dickens’s popular novel of _Martin Chuzzlewit_, who continually quoted
an imaginary MRS. HARRIS in attestation of the superiority of her
qualifications, and the infallibility of her opinions; and thus afforded
a parallel to the two newspapers, which appealed to each other as
independent authorities, being all the while the production of the same
editorial staff. _See_ introductory article.

~Mrs. Jones~, the house of office, a water-closet.

~M.T.~, railway slang used by porters and pointsmen for empties, or
empty carriages. _See_ MOLL THOMSON’S MARK.

~Much of a muchness~, alike, very much the same thing.

~Muck~, to beat, or excel. “It’s no use, his luck’s dead in; he’d MUCK a
thousand;” “he MUCKED me clean out,” &c. To RUN A MUCK, or GO A MUCKER,
to rush headlong into certain ruin. From a certain religious frenzy, or
intoxication caused by bhang, which is common among the Malays, and
which now and again causes an enthusiast, kreese in hand, to dash into a
crowd and devote every one he meets to death until he is himself killed,
or falls from exhaustion.—_Malay_, AMOK, slaughter.

~Muckender~, or MUCKENGER, a pocket-handkerchief.—_Old._ _Cf._
SNOTTINGER. The original name of the “Neckinger” in Bermondsey was “the
Devil’s Neck-handkerchief.” There is still a Neckinger Road and Messrs.
Bevington and Sons’ tannery in Bermondsey bears the name of the
Neckinger Mills.

~Mucker~, TO GO A, to go to grief, to ruin one’s prospects.—_Oxford
Univ._

~Muck-out~, to clean out; often applied to one utterly ruining an
adversary in gambling.

~Muck-snipe~, one who has been “MUCKED OUT,” or beggared, at gambling.
_See_ MUCK.

~Mud-crusher~, a word of contempt, used by the cavalry in reference to
the infantry.

~Mudfog~, “The British Association for the Advancement of Science.” Term
first used by Charles Dickens in _Bentley’s Miscellany_, about 1836.

~Mud-lark~, a man or woman who, with clothes tucked above the knee,
grovels through the mud on the banks of the Thames, when the tide is
low, for silver or pewter spoons, old bottles, pieces of iron, coal, or
any articles of the least value, deposited by the retiring tide, either
from passing ships or the sewers. Occasionally applied to those men who
cleanse the sewers, and who wear great boots and sou’-wester hats. Those
who are employed in banks and counting-houses, in collecting and other
out-door duties, have also this appellation.

~Mud-student~, a farming pupil. The name given to the students at the
Agricultural College, Cirencester.

~Muff~, a silly or weak-minded person, a duffer; MUFF has been defined
to be “a soft thing that holds a lady’s hand without squeezing it.”

~Muffin-cap~, a cap similar to that worn by a charity-boy.

~Muffin-face~, a white, soft, delicate, or whiskerless face.

~Muffin-worry~, an old lady’s tea party.

~Mufti~, the civilian dress of a naval or military officer when off
duty.—_Anglo-Indian._ From an Eastern word signifying a clergyman or
priest.

~Mug~, the mouth, or face.—_Old._

    “‘GOBLET AND MUG.’—Topers should bear in mind that what they quaff
    from the goblet afterwards appears in the MUG.”

~Mug~, to strike in the face, or fight. Also, to rob or swindle.
_Gaelic_, MUIG, to suffocate, oppress; _Irish_, MUGAIM, to kill,
destroy.

~Mug~, “to MUG oneself,” to get tipsy.

~Mugging~, a thrashing,—synonymous with “slogging,” both terms of the
“ring,” and frequently used by fighting men.

~Muggy~, drunk. Also, as applied to weather, stifling, oppressive.

~Mug-up~, to paint one’s face, or dress specially with a view to
impersonation.—_Theatrical._ To “cram” for an examination.—_Army._

~Mull~, “to make a MULL of it,” to spoil anything, or make a fool of
oneself.

~Mulligrubs.~ _Vide_ MOLLYGRUBS.

~Mullingar heifer~, a girl with thick ankles.—_Irish._ The story goes
that a traveller, passing through Mullingar, was so struck with this
local peculiarity in the women, that he determined to accost the next
one he met. “May I ask,” said he, “if you wear hay in your shoes?”
“Faith an’ I do,” said the girl; “and what then?” “Because,” says the
traveller, “that accounts for the calves of your legs coming down to
feed on it.”

~Multee kertever~, very bad. _Italian_, MOLTO CATTIVO. Generally used
with the affix of bloke when referring to a man. Phrase much used by
circus riders.

~Mum~, “to keep MUM,” to hold one’s peace. Hence “MUM’S the word,”—a
phrase which implies to all hearers that the matter to which it refers
must remain secret.

~Mummer~, a performer at a travelling theatre.—_Ancient._ Rustic
performers at Christmas in the West of England.

~Mump~, to beg. In Lincolnshire, Boxing-day is known as MUMPING DAY.

~Mumper~, a beggar. A collector of holiday tribute.

~Mumps~, the miserables. To feel MUMPISH is to be heavy, dull, and
stupid.

~Mundungus~, trashy, coarse tobacco. Sometimes used to represent
the half-soddened, half-calcined residuum at the bottom of an
all-but-smoked-out pipe, which, when knocked out, is vulgarly called the
TOPPER, _q.v. Spanish_, MONDONGO, black pudding.

~Mungarly~, bread, food. MUNG is an old word for mixed food, but
MUNGARLY is doubtless derived from the _Lingua Franca_, MANGIAR, to eat.
_See_ the following.

~Mungarly casa~, a baker’s shop; evidently a corruption of a Lingua
Franca phrase for an eating-house. The well-known “Nix Mangiare” stairs
at Malta derive their name from the endless beggars who lie there and
shout, “Nix mangiare,” _i.e._, “Nothing to eat,” to excite the
compassion of the English who land there,—an expression which exhibits
remarkably the mongrel composition of the _Lingua Franca_, MANGIARE
being Italian, and _Nix_ (_German_, NICHTS), an evident importation from
Trieste, or other Austrian seaport.

~Munging~, or MOUNGING, whining, begging, muttering.—_North._

~Muns~, the mouth. _German_, MUND.—_Old Cant._

~Murerk~, the mistress of the house. _See_ BURERK.

~Murkarker~, a monkey,—vulgar Cockney pronunciation of MACAUCO, a
species of monkey. Jacko Macauco, or Maccacco, as he was mostly called,
was the name of a famous fighting monkey, who used nearly fifty years
ago to display his prowess at the Westminster pit, where, after having
killed many dogs, he was at last “chawed up” by a bull terrier.

~Murphy~, a potato. Probably from the Irish national liking for
potatoes, MURPHY being a surname common amongst the Irish. MURPHIES
(edible) are sometimes called DONOVANS.

~Murphy~, “in the arms of MURPHY,” _i.e._, fast asleep. Corruption of
MORPHEUS.

~Mush~, an umbrella. Contraction of MUSHROOM.

~Mush~ (or MUSHROOM) ~faker~, an itinerant mender of umbrellas.

~Mushroom~, a hat, shaped like the fungus from which it takes its name,
often worn by demure ladies.

~Muslin~, a woman or girl; “he picked up a bit of MUSLIN.”

~Musta~, or MUSTER, a pattern, one of a sort. Anglo-Indian term used in
describing the make or pattern of anything. A sample of any kind of
merchandize. This word is very generally used in commercial transactions
all over the world.

~Mutton~, a contemptuous term for a woman of bad character; sometimes
varied to LACED MUTTON. The expression was used as a cant term for a
“wild duck” in the reign of James I. As a slang term it was employed by
Ben Jonson in his masque of _Neptune’s Triumph_, which was written for
display at Court on Twelfth Night, 1623; “a fine LACED MUTTON or two,”
are the words applied to wantons. Shakspeare has the term. In that class
of English society which does not lay any claim to refinement, a fond
lover is often spoken of as being “fond of his MUTTON,” which, by the
way, in this place does not mean the woman so much as something else.

~Mutton chops~, a sheep’s-head. A man who has dined off sheep’s-head
dignifies his meal by calling it MUTTON CHOPS (chaps).

~Mutton-fist~, an uncomplimentary title for any one having a large and
muscular, bony, or coarse hand.

~Mutton-walk~, the saloon at Drury Lane Theatre. A vulgar appellation
applied to this place early in the last century, still in use in the
neighbourhood of Covent Garden, which was formerly the great resort for
the gay and giddy of both sexes.

~Muzzle~, the mouth.

~Muzzle~, to fight or thrash; to throttle or garrotte.

~Muzzler~, a blow in the mouth; a dram of spirits.

~Muzzy~, intoxicated.

~My aunt~, AUNT JONES, or MRS. JONES, the closet of decency, or house of
office.

~My lord~, a nickname given to a hunchback.

~My tulip~, a term of endearment used by the lower orders to persons and
animals; “‘Kim up, MY TULIP,’ as the coster said to his donkey when
thrashing him with an ash stick.”

~My uncle~, the pawnbroker,—generally used when any person questions
the whereabouts of a domestic article. “Oh! only at MY UNCLE’S” is the
reply. “Up the spout” has the same meaning. It is worthy of remark that
the French call this useful relative “ma tante,” my aunt.

~Nab~, to catch, to seize; “NAB the rust,” to take offence.—_Ancient_,
fourteenth century. _See_ NAP.

~Nab the rust~, to take offence.

~Nabob~, an Eastern prince, a retired Indian official,—hence a slang
term for a capitalist. From Nawaub.

~Nabs~, self; my NABS, myself; his NABS, himself.—_North Country Cant._

~Nag~, to persistently talk in a scolding manner, after the manner of
Mrs. Caudle. NAGGING is supposed to be persistent, persevering,
passionless scolding.

~Nail~, to steal, or capture; “paid on the NAIL,” _i.e._, paid ready
money; NAILED, taken up, or caught,—probably in allusion to the
practice of NAILING bad money to the counter. We say, “as dead as a
door-NAIL;” most possibly because of “apt alliteration.” Shakspeare has
the expression in _Henry IV._—

    “_Falstaff._ What! is the old king dead?

    _Pistol._ As NAIL in door.”

Dickens, in that marvellous little book, _A Christmas Carol_, says:—

    “Old Marley was as dead as a DOOR-NAIL.

    “Mind! I don’t mean to say that I know of my own knowledge what
    there is particularly dead about a DOOR-NAIL. I might have been
    inclined myself to regard a COFFIN-NAIL as the deadest piece of
    ironmongery in the trade. But the wisdom of our ancestors is in the
    simile: and my unhallowed hands shall not disturb it, or the
    country’s done for. You will, therefore, permit me to repeat,
    emphatically, that Marley was as dead as a DOOR-NAIL.”

~Nail in one’s coffin~, a dram, “a drop o’ summat’ short,” a jocular,
but disrespectful phrase, used by the lower orders to each other at the
moment of lifting a glass of spirits to their lips. “Well, good luck!
here’s another NAIL IN MY COFFIN.” This is probably in ridicule of
teetotal or temperance preachers, and the arguments adduced by them.
Another phrase with old topers is “shedding a tear,” also “wiping an
eye.”

~Namby-pamby~, particular, over-nice, effeminate. This was possibly of
Pope’s invention, and first applied by him to the affected short-lined
verses addressed by Ambrose Phillips to Lord Carteret’s infant children.
_See Johnson’s Life of Pope._

~Nammus~, or NAMOUS, to be off, to get away; “let’s NAMMUS, somebody’s
coming.” _See_ VAMOS.

~Nanny-shop~, a disreputable house.

~Nantee~, not any, or “I have none.” NANTEE also means “shut up!” or
“leave off!” _Italian_, NIENTE, nothing. _See_ DINARLY.—_Lingua
Franca._

~Nantee palaver~, no conversation, _i.e._, hold your tongue. Very often
in this sense also shortened to NANTEE only. Originally _Lingua Franca_,
but now general.

~Nap~, or NAB, to take, steal, or receive; “you’ll NAP it,” _i.e._, you
will catch a beating.—_North_; also _Old Cant_.

~Nap~, to break, or rap with a hammer. _See_ KNAP.—_North._

~Nap~, or NAPPER, a hat. From “nab,” a hat, cap, or head.—_Old Cant._

~Nap nix~, a person who works at his trade, and occasionally goes on the
stage to act minor parts without receiving any pay. The derivation is
obvious. _See_ NAP and NIX, _i.e._, NICHTS.

~Nap one’s bib~, to cry, shed tears, or carry one’s point.

~Nap the regulars~, to divide the booty.

~Nap the teaze~, to be privately whipped in prison.

~Nark~, a person in the pay of the police; a common informer; one who
gets his living by laying traps for publicans, &c. Sometimes called a
“nose.”

~Nark~, to watch, or look after; “NARK the titter,” watch the girl.

~Narp~, a shirt.—_Scotch._

~Narrow~, mean, sordid.—_Scotch._ In common slang, dull of
comprehension, as distinguished from wide awake.

~Nasty~, ill-tempered, cross-grained. “He was very NASTY,” _i.e._, he
was ill-humoured.

~Nation~, or TARNATION, very, or exceedingly. Corruption of damnation.

~Natty~, pretty, neat, tidy.—_Old._

~Natural~, an idiot, a simpleton. Sometimes HALF-NATURAL.

~Navvy~, an excavator employed in making railways, canals, &c.
Originally slang, but now a recognised term. Short for navigator, a term
humorously applied to excavators when their chief work was that of
cutting and banking canals, making dykes to rivers, &c.

~N. C.~, “enough said,” being the initials of NUF CED. A certain
theatrical manager spells, it is said, in this style.

~Near~, mean and stingy.

~Neardy~, a person in authority over another; master, parent, or
foreman.—_North._

~Neat~, unmixed with water. “Two half goes of gin, one NEAT, the other
cold,” meaning one as drawn, the other diluted with cold water. The
Americans use the word “straight” instead of NEAT: “I’ll take mine
straight.”

~Neck~, to swallow. Neck-oil, drink of any kind.

~Neck and crop~, entirely, completely; “he chuck’d him NECK AND CROP out
of window.”

~Neck and neck.~ Horses run NECK AND NECK in a race when they are so
perfectly equal that one cannot be said to be before the other.

~Neck or nothing~, desperate. Originally a steeplechase phrase.

~Neck beef~, a synonym for coarseness. “As coarse as neck ends of beef.”

~Neckinger~, a cravat. _See_ MUCKENGER.

~Ned~, a guinea. HALF-NED, half-a-guinea.

~Neddy~, a considerable quantity, as “a NEDDY of fruit,” “a NEDDY of
fish,” &c.—_Irish slang._

~Neddy~, a donkey. On Sunday, when a costermonger, if at all well to do,
takes his family out for an airing in his “shallow,” the donkey is
called “Eddard.”

~Neddy~, a life preserver. Possibly contraction of Kennedy, the name of
the first man, it is said in St. Giles’s, who had his head broken by a
poker.

~Ned Stokes~, the four of spades.—_North Hants._ _See Gentleman’s
Magazine_ for 1791, p. 141.

~Needful~, money, cash; the “one thing NEEDFUL” for the accomplishment
of most pet designs.

~Needle~, to annoy. To “cop the NEEDLE” is to become vexed or annoyed.

~Needy mizzler~, a shabby person; a tramp who runs away without paying
for his lodging.

~Never trust me~, an ordinary phrase with low Londoners, and common in
Shakspeare’s time, _vide Twelfth Night_. It is generally used instead of
an oath, calling vengeance on the asseverator, if such-and-such does
not come to pass.

~Newgate fringe~, or FRILL, the collar of beard worn under the chin; so
called from its occupying the position of the rope when Jack Ketch
operates. Another name for it is a TYBURN COLLAR.

~Newgate Knocker~, the term given to the lock of hair which
costermongers and thieves usually twist back towards the ear. The shape
is supposed to resemble the knocker on the prisoners’ door at Newgate—a
resemblance that carries a rather unpleasant suggestion to the wearer.
Sometimes termed a COBBLER’S KNOT, or COW-LICK.

~Newmarket~, in tossing, when the game is “two out of three,” that is,
when he who gains the first two tosses wins. When the first toss is
decisive, the game is termed “sudden death.”

~Nibble~, to take, or steal. NIBBLER, a petty thief.

~Nib-cove~, a gentleman. NIBSOMEST CRIBS, best or gentlemen’s
houses.—_Beggar’s Cant._

~Nib-like~, gentlemanly.

~Nibs~, self. His NIBS, means any one who may be referred to. As, “I
told his NIBS,” or “stag his NIBS.” “Your NIBS,” yourself.

~Nick~, or OLD NICK, the devil.—_Scandinavian_, KNICKAR, one of the
names of Odin, as the destroying or evil principle.

~Nick~, to hit the mark; “he’s NICKED it,” _i.e._, won his point. Also
to steal. To be “out on the NICK,” is to be out thieving. Sometimes
described as being “on the pinch.”

~Nick-nack~, a trifle.—Originally _Cant_.

~Niggling~, trifling, or idling; taking short steps in
walking.—_North._

~Nightcap~, a glass of “warm with” taken the last thing at night.

~Night-hunter~, a poacher.—_North._ Also a London prostitute. Sometimes
in the latter capacity varied to night-hawk.

~Nil~, half; half profits, &c.

~Nilly-willy~, _i.e._, NILL YE, WILL YE, whether you will or no; a
familiar version of the _Latin_, NOLENS VOLENS. Generally written now,
WILLY-NILLY.

~Nimming~, stealing. _Old English_, NIM, to take. Motherwell, the Scotch
poet, thought the old word NIM (to snatch or pick up) was derived from
_nam, nam_, the tiny words or cries of an infant, when eating anything
which pleases its little palate. A negro proverb has the word:—

    “Buckra man NAM crab,
    Cram NAM buckra man.”

Or, in the buckra man’s language—

    “White man eat [or steal] the crab,
    And then crab eat the white man.”


Shakspeare evidently had the word NIM in his head when he portrayed Nym.

~Nincompoop~, a fool, a hen-pecked husband, a “Jerry Sneak.”—Corruption
of _non compos mentis_.

~Nine corns~, a pipeful of tobacco.

~Ninepence~, “nice as NINEPENCE,” all right, right to a nicety. A
correspondent says:—“This most undoubtedly should be NINE-PINS. For at
the game of that name, in fairness to both parties, the nine pins must
always be set up with great accuracy. There is no nicety in NINEPENCE!”
Evidently this correspondent does not know how nice it is to have
ninepence, after being without money. At all events the phrase _is_
“nice as NINEPENCE.”

~Nines~, “dressed up to the NINES,” in a showy or _recherché_ manner. Up
to the NINES, up to the dodges and “wrinkles” of life.

~Nine Shillings~, cool audacity; most probably derived from the
_French_, NONCHALANCE.

~Ning-nang~, horse-coupers’ term for a worthless thoroughbred.

~Ninnyhammer~, a foolish, ignorant person. Generally shortened to NINNY.
NINNY is also short for nincompoop.

~Nip~, to steal, to take up quickly. _See_ NAP and NIB.

~Nipcheese~, a purser.—_Old Sea Slang._

~Nipper~, a sharp lad. Originally a superior grade among cut-purses.

~Nix~, nothing. _German_, NICHTS. _See_ MUNGARLY.

~Nix!~ the signal word of schoolboys and workpeople to each other that
the master, or other person in authority, is approaching.

~Nix my dolly~, once a very popular slang song, beginning—

    “In a box of a stone jug I was born,
        Of a hempen widow all forlorn;
    And my old dad, as I’ve heard say,
        Was a famous merchant in capers gay;
            NIX MY DOLLY, pals, fake away!”

“Capers” of course here refers to the mode of the old gentleman’s
decease.

~Niz-priz~, a writ of nisi-prius.—_Legal._

~Nizzie~, a fool, a coxcomb.—_Old Cant, vide Triumph of Wit_.

~Nob~, the head.—_Pugilistic_; “bob a NOB,” a shilling a head. _Ancient
Cant_, NEB. NOB is an early English word, and is used in the romance of
_Kynge Alinaunder_ (thirteenth century) for a head; originally, no
doubt, the same as _knob_.

~Nob~, a person of high position, a “swell,” a NOBleman,—of which word
it may be an abbreviation, or of NOBILIS. _See_ SNOB.

~Nob.~ When the knave of trumps is held at the game of cribbage, the
holder counts “one for his NOB.”

~Nobba~, nine. _Italian_, NOVE; _Spanish_, NOVA,—the _b_ and _v_ being
interchangeable, as in sa_b_e and sa_vv_ey. Slang introduced by the
“organ-grinders” from Italy.

~Nobba saltee~, ninepence. _Lingua Franca_, NOVE SOLDI.

~Nobbing cheat~, the gallows.—_Old Cant._

~Nobbing~, collecting money; “what NOBBINGS?” _i.e._, how much have you
got or collected from the crowd? This term is much used by “buskers.”

~Nobble~, to cheat, to overreach; to discover. In the racing world, to
“NOBBLE” a horse, is to “get at,” and lame or poison him.

~Nobbler~, a blow on the NOB, a finishing stroke; “that’s a NOBBLER for
him,” _i.e._, a settler.—_Pugilistic._

~Nobbler~, a confederate of thimble-riggers and card-sharpers, who plays
earnestly, as if a stranger to the “rig,” and thus draws unsuspecting
persons into a game. The same as a “bonnet” or “bearer-up.” In the North
of England, a low, cunning lawyer.

~Nobby~, or NOBBISH, fine or showy; NOBBILY, showily. _See_ SNOB for
derivation.

~No flies~, an emphatic addition made to an assertion for the purpose of
giving it weight. It really means “no error” or “no mistake.” Both of
them popular; as, “A jolly fine girl, and NO FLIES!”

~No-fly~, artful, designing. Term much used among printers, who shorten
it to “N.F.”

~Noli-me-tangere~, the Scotch fiddle, or other contagious disease.

~Non-com~, a non-commissioned officer in the army.

~No odds~, no matter, of no consequence.—_Latimer’s Sermon before
Edward VI._

~Nooning~, an interval for rest and refreshment, taken at midday by
travellers in hot countries.

~Norfolk-Howards~, bugs; a person named Ephraim Bug some few years back
advertised, that for the future he would call himself by the more
aristocratic appellation of NORFOLK HOWARD.

~North~, cunning. The inhabitants of Yorkshire and the Northern counties
are supposed, like the canny Scots, to get the better of other people in
dealing; hence the phrase, “He’s too far NORTH for me,” _i.e._, too
cunning for me to deal with.

~North country compliment~, to give or offer anything that is not wanted
by either giver or receiver is to pass a NORTH COUNTRY COMPLIMENT.

~Norwicher~, more than one’s share; said of a person who leaves less
than half the contents of a tankard for his companion. In what way the
term originated, or why Norwich was selected before any other city is
not known. Most likely from the slanders which the inhabitants of one
town are always inventing about their neighbours.

~Nose~, a thief who turns informer; a paid spy; generally called a
policeman’s NOSE; “on the NOSE,” on the look-out.

~Nose~, to give information to the police, to turn approver.

~Nose~, “to pay through the NOSE,” to pay an extravagant price.

~Nose-bag~, a visitor at a watering-place, or house of refreshment, who
carries his own victuals. Term applied by waiters.

~Nose ’em~, or FOGUS, tobacco. NOSE ’EM is but a contraction of the
rhyming slang, which _see_.

~Nose-ender~, a straight blow delivered full on the nasal promontory.

~Nose in the manger~, TO PUT ONE’S, to sit down to eat. To “put on the
nose-bag” is to eat hurriedly, or to eat while continuing at work.

~Nose out of joint~, TO PUT ONE’S; to supplant, supersede, or mortify a
person by excelling him.

~Noser~, a hard blow, leading to a bloody or contused nose.—_Pugilistic._

~Notional~, imaginative, full of ideas. Used in America to express a
wife’s imaginations with regard to her husband’s doings.

~Nouse~, comprehension, perception.—_Old_, apparently from the _Greek_,
νοῦς. _Gaelic_ and _Irish_, NOS, knowledge, perception.

~Nowhere~, horses not placed in a race—that are neither first, second,
nor third—are said to be NOWHERE, especially when this lack of position
happens to favourites.

~Number of his mess~, when a man dies in the army or navy, he is said to
“lose the NUMBER OF HIS MESS.”

~Nurse~, a curious term applied to competition in omnibuses. Two
omnibuses are placed on the road to NURSE, or take care of, each
opposition “bus,” one before, the other behind. Of course the central or
NURSED bus has very little chance, unless it happens to be a favourite
with the public. Recent legislation and tramways have done much to do
away with NURSING. NURSE also means to cheat or swindle; trustees are
sometimes said to NURSE property, _i.e._, gradually eat it up
themselves.

~Nut~, the head, in pugilistic slang. Used as an exclamation at a fight,
it means to strike on the head. In tossing it is a direction to hide the
head; to be “off one’s NUT,” to be crazed or idiotic.

~Nut-cut~, roguish, mischievous. A good-natured term of
reproach.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Nuts~, to be NUTS on anything or person is to be pleased with or fond
of it or him; a self-satisfied man is said to be NUTS on himself.
NUTTED, taken in by a man who professed to be NUTS on you.

~Nux~, the “plant,” or object in view. “Stoll up to the NUX?” “Do you
fully comprehend what is wanted?”—_North Country Cant._

~Oaf~, a lumbering, awkward fellow.

~Oak~, the outer door of college rooms; to “sport one’s OAK,” to be “not
at home” to visitors. _See_ SPORT.—_University._

[Illustration: A “Sporting Door,” or “Oak.”]

~Oar~, “to put in an OAR,” to interfere.

    “I put my OAR in no man’s boat.”—_Thackeray._

~Oat~, an atom. Probable corruption of iota, or perhaps from the small
size of an oat. “I never got an OAT of it,” I never received the
smallest portion.

~Oat-stealer~, an ostler.

~Obfuscated~, intoxicated.

~Obliquitous~, oblivious of distinction between right and
wrong.—_American._

~Obstropolous~, Cockney corruption of obstreperous.

~Ochre~, money, generally applied to gold, for a very obvious reason.

~O’clock~, “like ONE O’CLOCK,” a favourite comparison with the lower
orders, implying briskness; otherwise “like winkin’.” “To know what’s
O’CLOCK” is to be wide-awake, sharp, and experienced.

~Odd man out~, a street or public-house game at tossing. The number of
players is three or more. Each tosses up a coin, and if two come down
head, and one comes tail, or _vice versâ_, the ODD MAN loses or wins, as
may have been agreed upon. Frequently used to victimize a “flat.” If all
be alike, then the toss goes for nothing, and the coppers are again
“skied.” It is easy for two men to arrange matters beforehand at this
game, and so swindle a third.

~Odd man~, a man who trains in company with a boat’s crew, so that in
the event of any one falling ill the seat will be fairly occupied.

~Odds~, a phrase equivalent to “consequence;” “what’s the ODDS?” _i.e._,
what is the expected result? “It’s no ODDS,” _i.e._, of no consequence.
ODDS, in sporting phraseology, refers to the proportions or differences
of a bet. One bookmaker will lay ODDS of “six to one” against such a
horse winning; whilst another, more speculative, or in the receipt of a
first-rate “tip” (information about the horse in question) will lay
“eight,” or even “ten to one.”

~Od rot it~ (_Colman’s Broad Grins_), DRAT IT, OD’S BLOOD, and all other
exclamations commencing with OD, are nothing but softened or suppressed
oaths. OD is a corruption of GOD, and DRAT of ROT.

~Off and on~, vacillating; “an OFF AND ON kind of a chap,” one who is
always undecided.

~Off at the head~, crazy.—_Oxfordshire._

~Off one’s chump.~ To be crazy is to be OFF ONE’S CHUMP; this is varied
by the word CHUMPY. A mild kind of lunatic is also said to be “off his
head,” which means of course exactly the same as the first phrase.

~Off one’s feed.~ To be unable to eat is to be OFF ONE’S FEED.
Originally stable slang.

~Off the horn~, a term used in reference to very hard steak, which is
fancifully said to be OFF THE HORN.

~Office~, “to give the OFFICE,” to give a hint dishonestly to a
confederate, thereby enabling him to win a game or bet, the profits
being shared. Also in sporting phraseology to give any information worth
having.

~Offish~, distant, not familiar. Corruption of STAND-OFFISH.

~Ogle~, to look, or reconnoitre.

~Ogles~, eyes.—_Old Cant. French_, ŒIL.

~Oil of palms~, or PALM OIL, money.

~Ointment~, medical student slang for butter.

~O. K.~, a matter to be O. K. (OLL KORRECT, _i.e._, all correct), must
be on the “square,” and perfectly in order. This is an Americanism, and
is derived from the initials O. K., said to have been marked on a
document by an official to signify that all was right and proper.

~Old boots~, a simile as general in its application as it is irrelevant.
“Like OLD BOOTS” means like anything. “As cheeky as OLD BOOTS;” “As
quick as OLD BOOTS,” seem a little more reasonable, new boots being
somewhat unfavourable to speedy locomotion.

~Old dog~, a knowing blade, an experienced person. Butler uses the
phrase, _Hudibras_, part ii. canto iii. 208, where it was said of
Sidrophel, “And was OLD DOG at physiology.” An Irish proverb says, “OLD
DOG for hard road,” meaning that it requires an experienced person to
execute a difficult undertaking.

~Old gentleman~, the devil. Also a card almost imperceptibly longer than
the rest of the pack, used by sharpers for the purpose of cheating.

~Old gooseberry~ (_see_ GOOSEBERRY), OLD HARRY (_Old Hairy_), OLD
SCRATCH, all synonyms for the devil.

~Old gown~, smuggled tea.

~Old horse~, salt junk, or beef.—_Sea._

~Old hoss~, a term of endearment, originally an Americanism, but now in
common use here among friends.

~Old Lady in Threadneedle Street~, the Bank of England.

~Old man~, in American merchant ships, the master. The phrase is
becoming common in English ships.

~Old salt~, a thorough sailor.

~Old Tom~, extra strong gin; sometimes termed CAT’S WATER. Various
reasons are given for the use of the words OLD TOM. The distillers have
the sign of a tom cat on their illuminated placards. The origin of the
phrase is, however, in the fact that the managing clerk of a once
celebrated “gin-spinning” firm, who was known as OLD TOM, used to keep a
special bottle of extra good stuff with which to regale customers when
they settled their accounts. To get a drink of OLD TOM’S was then a
great favour. Gradually the title became popular as representing very
good strong gin.

~Oliver~, the moon; “OLIVER don’t widdle,” _i.e._, the moon does not
shine. _Nearly obsolete._

~Ollapod~, a country apothecary. From George Coleman’s comedy of _The
Poor Gentleman_.

~Omee~, a master or landlord; “the OMEE of the carsey’s a nark on the
pitch,” the master of the house will not let us perform. _Italian_,
UOMO, a man; “UOMO DELLA CASA,” the master of the house. _Latin_,
HOMO.—_Lingua Franca._

~Omnium gatherum~, an indiscriminate collection of articles; a numerous
and by no means select assemblage.

~On~, “to be ON,” in public-house or vulgar parlance, is synonymous with
getting “tight” or tipsy; “it’s St. Monday with him, I see he’s ON
again,” _i.e._, drunk as usual, or on the road to it. “I’m ON” also
expresses a person’s acceptance of an offered bet. To GET ON a horse or
a man is to make bets on it or him. “Try it ON,” a defiant challenge to
a person.

~On the fly~, getting one’s living by thieving or other illegitimate
means; the phrase is applied to men the same as “on the loose” is to
women. ON THE FLY also means on the drink.

~On the loose~, obtaining a living by prostitution; in reality, on the
streets. The term is applied to females only, excepting in the case of
“sprees,” when men carousing are sometimes said to be ON THE LOOSE.

~On the nose~, on the watch or look-out. _See_ NOSE.

~On the shelf~, transported. With old maids it has another and very
different meaning.

~On the tiles~, out all night “on the spree,” or carousing,—in allusion
to the London cats on their amatory excursions. _See_ CATERWAULING.

~One-er~, that which stands for ONE, a blow that requires no repeating.
In _The Old Curiosity Shop_, the “Marchioness” tells Dick Swiveller that
“her missus is a ONE-ER”—there a variation of “stunner.”

~One in ten~, a parson. In allusion to the tithing system.

~Onion~, a watch-seal.

~O. P.~ Publishers’ reply to an inquiry for a book or paper that is OUT
OF PRINT.

~Open the ball~, to commence anything.

~Oracle~, “to work the ORACLE,” to plan, manœuvre, to succeed by a wily
stratagem.

~Orate~, an Americanism, which means, to speak in public, or make an
oration.

~Organ-grinder~, an itinerant who is supposed to “GRIND” music out of a
barrel-organ.

~Originator~, an inventor of plans for the formation of joint-stock
companies. The originator submits his schemes to the promoter, who
accepts or rejects them.

~Otter~, eightpence. _Italian_, OTTO, eight.—_Lingua Franca._

~Ottomy~, a thin man, a skeleton, a dwarf. Vulgar pronunciation of
ANATOMY. Shakspeare has ATOMY.

~Out~, a dram glass. These glasses are two-OUT (half-quartern),
three-OUT, and four-OUT. An _habitué_ of a gin-shop, desirous of
treating a brace of friends, calls for “a quartern of gin and three
OUTS,” by which he means three glasses which will exactly contain the
quartern. Really, the word glasses is understood. The man actually
means, and one or more three-OUT glasses.

~Out~, in round games, where several play, and there can be but one
loser, the winners in succession STAND OUT, while the others PLAY OFF.

~Out and out~, prime, excellent, of the first quality; beyond measure.
OUT-AND-OUTER, one who is of an OUT-AND-OUT description, “up” to
anything.

An ancient MS. has this couplet, which shows the antiquity of the
phrase:—

    “The Kyng was good alle aboute,
    And she was wycked OUTE AND OUTE.”

~Outcry~, an auction.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Outing~, a day’s holiday. The Oxford and Cambridge boatrace, the Derby,
and other events of a like character, are each said to be simply excuses
to the Cockneys for a day’s OUTING.

~Out of collar~, out of place,—in allusion to servants. When in place,
the term is IN COLLAR. Most likely from “head in the COLLAR,” said of
horses when hard at work.

~Out on the loose~, “on the spree,” in search of adventures. _See_ ON
THE LOOSE.

~Out on the pickaroon.~ PICARONE is Spanish for a thief, but this phrase
does not necessarily mean anything dishonest, but is often used to mean
readiness for anything in the way of excitement. It also means to be in
search of anything profitable, without much care as to honesty or
otherwise.

~Outsider~, a person who does not habitually bet, or is not admitted to
the “ring,” a duffer or good-for-nothing fellow. Also, a horse whose
name does not appear among the “favourites.”—_Sporting._

~Over!~ or OVER THE LEFT, _i.e._, the left shoulder—a common
exclamation of disbelief in what is being narrated,—sometimes implying
that the results of a proposed plan will be OVER THE LEFT, _i.e._, in
the wrong direction, loss instead of gain.

~Over~, generally used in connexion with come, as, “He came it rather
strong OVER me,” _i.e._, tried to intimidate or compel me. The same
phrase would also be used to imply that an excess of flattery or praise
was being employed for a similar purpose, but that the adulation was
being “laid on a little too thick” to be considered genuine. Also used
thus sometimes: “You mustn’t come Shakspeare OVER me,” _i.e._, “you
mustn’t assume an air of immeasurable literary superiority OVER me.”
“You mustn’t come Rothschild OVER me,” &c.

~Over~, in cricket, four balls delivered from one end to another. After
an OVER has been bowled, the fielders, wicket-keepers, &c., change ends,
and the bowling goes on from the recent batting wicket. A MAIDEN-OVER is
an OVER from which no runs are obtained. Four balls is the regulation
number to an OVER in all important matches; but little clubs and
practice elevens suit their own convenience.

~Overs~, the odd money remaining after the daily accounts are made up at
a banking-house,—usually divided amongst the clerks. _See_ MENAVELINGS
and SHORTS.

~Owned~, a slang expression used by the ultra-Evangelicals when a
popular preacher makes many converts. The converts themselves are called
his “seals.”

~P. P.~, an expression much in use among racing men, which means play or
pay, _i.e._, either go on with the arrangement or forfeit the money. The
following is a law of the turf on the subject:—

    The following races shall be considered “play or pay”:—The Derby
    and Oaks at Epsom, the St. Leger at Doncaster, the Two Thousand
    Guineas, the One Thousand Guineas, the Cesarewitch and
    Cambridgeshire, at Newmarket, the Ascot, Goodwood, and Doncaster
    Cups, and all handicaps above 200 sovs. value with two forfeits, the
    minor of which shall not be less than 5 sovs.; and the Committees of
    Tattersall’s, and of the Subscription Room at Newmarket, will take
    no cognisance of any disputes respecting “play or pay” bets on any
    other races, or of any bets made upon handicap races before the
    weights are published.

This is the exact law on the subject, but as a rule all bets on
horse-racing are considered P. P. unless otherwise arranged. In all
matches, though, whether turf, pedestrian, aquatic, or otherwise, a run
is given for the money in ordinary betting transactions.

~P’s and q’s~, particular points, precise behaviour; “mind your P’S and
Q’S,” be very careful. Originating, according to some, from the
similarity of P’S and Q’S in the hornbook alphabet, and therefore the
warning of an old dame to her pupils, or, according to others, of a
French dancing-master to his pupils, to mind their _pieds_ (feet) and
_queues_ (wigs) when bowing.

~Pack~, to go away; “now, then, PACK off there,” _i.e._, be off, don’t
stop here any longer.—_Old._ “Make speede to flee, be PACKING
awaie.”—_Baret’s Alvearie_, 1580. Contraction of “PACK up and be off.”
Sometimes the term “sent PACKING” is used to indicate a sudden
discharge, as of a servant or mistress.

~Packets~, hoaxing lies. Sometimes used as an exclamation of
incredulity.—_North._

~Pad~, “to stand PAD,” to beg with a small piece of paper pinned on the
breast, inscribed, “I am starving.”

~Pad~, the highway; also a tramp or itinerant musician.

~Pad the hoof~, to walk; “PADDING THE HOOF, on the high toby,” tramping
or walking on the high road.

    “Trudge, plod away o’ the HOOF.”—_Merry Wives_, i. 3.

~Padding~, the light articles in the monthly magazines, of which the
serial stories are the main attraction. Publishers of magazines seem to
think that if they get a serial story from a popular novelist they can
pack any amount of rubbish into the remaining pages. This is not so in
America, as magazines like the _Atlantic Monthly_ and the _Overland
Monthly_ show.

~Padding-ken~, or CRIB, tramps’ and boys’ lodging-house.

~Paddle~, to go or run away.—_American._

~Paddy~, PAT, or PADDY WHACK, an Irishman. A nickname of PATRICK.

    “I’m PADDY WHACK, from Ballyhack,
      Not long ago turn’d soldier;
    In storm and sack, in front attack,
      None other can be boulder.”—_Irish Song._

~Paddy’s goose~, the sign of the White Swan, a noted flash public-house
in the east of London, supposed to be Paddy’s idea of a GOOSE.

~Paddy’s land~, “ould Ireland.”

~Padre~, a clergyman. From the Portuguese.

~Pal~, a partner, acquaintance, friend, an accomplice. _Gipsy_, a
brother.

~Palampo~, a quilt or bed-cover. Probably from PALANPORE, a town in
India, renowned for its manufacture of chintz
counterpanes.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Palaver~, to ask, or talk—deceitfully or otherwise, as occasion
requires; “PALAVER to his nibs for a shant of bivvy,” ask the master for
a pot of beer. NANTEE PALAVER (pronounced PERLARVER), cease talking. In
this sense used by tramps. Derived from the Portuguese.

~Pall~, to stop; “PALL that,” spoken authoritatively, means, cease what
you are doing. From PALL, a small instrument which is used to stop the
windlass or capstan at sea. When a man says, “I am PALLED,” he
means he cannot or dare not say any more. A sailor, on receiving any
extraordinary intelligence, will say, “You PALL me,” _i.e._, you
confound me. Most likely from the order frequently given on board ship,
“Ease and PALL.”

~Palm~, to impose upon. “You can’t PALM that off upon me,” is said when
an intending purchaser is suspicious of the quality of the article
offered.

~Palm oil~, or PALM SOAP, money; also, a bribe.

~Palmer~, a swindler who used to visit shops under the pretence of
collecting harp halfpence. To induce shopkeepers to search for them, he
offered thirteenpence for one shilling’s-worth, when many persons were
silly enough to empty a large quantity of copper on their counters. The
PALMER, a proficient with his fingers, generally contrived to conceal
some before he left the shop.

~Palming~, robbing shops by pairs—one thief bargaining with apparent
intent to purchase, whilst the other watches his opportunity to steal.
The following anecdote will give an idea of their _modus operandi_. A
man once entered a “ready-made” boot and shoe shop, and desired to be
shown a pair of boots—his companion staying outside and amusing himself
by looking in at the window. The one who required to be fresh shod was
apparently of a humble and deferential turn, for he placed his hat on
the floor directly he stepped into the shop. Boot after boot was tried
on until at last a fit was obtained, when in rushed a man, snatched up
the customer’s hat left near the door, and ran down the street as fast
as his legs could carry him. Away went the customer after his hat, and
Crispin, standing at the door, clapped his hands, and shouted, “Go it,
you’ll catch him!”—little thinking that it was a concerted trick, and
that neither his boots nor the customer would ever return. Instances of
this kind of work frequently occur. PALMING sometimes refers to
secreting money or rings in the hand, as well as to bribing. PALMING is
also the generic term for all that kind of conjuring which depends on
manual dexterity, and which is totally distinct from the
mechanical-contrivance department.

~Pam~, the knave of clubs at the game of loo; or, in street phraseology,
while the “Judicious Bottleholder” was alive, Lord Palmerston.

~Pannikin~, a small pan.

~Pannum~, food, bread.—_Lingua Franca_, PANNEN; _Latin_, PANIS;
_Ancient Cant_, YANNAM.

~Pannum-bound~, said of a pauper or prisoner when his food is stopped.
PANNUM-STRUCK, very hungry, starving.

~Panny~, a house—public or otherwise; “flash PANNY,” a public-house
used by thieves; PANNY-MEN, housebreakers. PANNY, in thieves’ cant, also
signifies a burglary.

~Pantalettes~, the drawers worn in America by little girls.

~Pantile~, a hat. The term PANTILE is properly applied to the mould into
which the sugar is poured which is afterwards known as “loaf sugar.”
Thus, PANTILE, from whence comes the phrase, “a sugar-loaf hat,”
originally signified a tall, conical hat, in shape similar to that
usually represented as the head-gear of a bandit. From PANTILE the more
modern slang term TILE has been derived. Halliwell gives PANTILE SHOP, a
meeting-house, from the steeple-crowned or PANTILE hats of its
frequenters. PANTILE also means a flat cake with jam on it, given to
boys at boarding-schools instead of pudding.

~Pantiler~, a Dissenting preacher. Probably from the practice of the
Quakers, and many Dissenters, of not removing their hats in a place of
worship; or from the sugar-loaf hats originally worn by Puritans.
Another derivation is from the earthen tiles, technically PANTILES
(tiles hollowed in the middle, as distinguished from “pintiles,” the
older sort, which are flat, smaller, and pinned or nailed to the
rafters), with which meeting-houses of Dissenters are usually covered;
hence the meeting-house came to be called a PANTILE, and its frequenters
PANTILERS.

~Pants~, American term for trousers. Here used to represent the long
drawers worn underneath.

~Panupetaston~, a loose overcoat with wide sleeves, now out of
fashion.—_Oxford University._

~Paper-maker~, a rag-gatherer, or gutter-raker—similar to the
chiffonnier of Paris. Also, a man who tramps through the country, and
collects rags on the pretence that he is an agent to a paper mill.

~Paper-Worker~, a wandering vendor of street literature; one who sells
ballads, dying speeches, and confessions, sometimes termed a “running
stationer.”

~Parachute~, a parasol.

~Paradise~, French slang for the gallery of a theatre, “up amongst the
GODS,” which _see_.

~Parish lantern~, the moon.

~Parish prig~, or PARISH BULL, a parson.—_Thieves’ cant._

~Parney~, rain; “dowry of PARNEY,” a quantity of rain. _Anglo-Indian_
slang from the _Hindoo_, PANI, water; _Gipsy_, PANE. Old Indian officers
always call brandy-and-water “brandy PAWNEE.”

~Parson~, a signpost. Common term in the north, where they say that the
PARSON points, but does not lead. This is given, as the lawyers say,
“without prejudice.”

~Parson Trulliber~, a rude, vulgar, country clergyman, devoted to
agricultural pursuits; the race is most probably now extinct. From the
pig-feeding and pig-headed parson in _Joseph Andrews_.

~Parson’s nose~, the hind part of a goose—a savoury mouthful. Sometimes
called the POPE’S NOSE.

~Part~, to pay, restore, or give up; “he’s a right un, he is; I know’d
he’d PART,” _i.e._, he is a liberal (or punctual) person, and pays his
debts, or bestows gratuities. The term is in general use in sporting
circles, and is very commonly employed when speaking of the settlement
of bets after a race. It is probably derived from the very common
reference to stingy people, who are described as not liking to PART with
their money.

~Parter~, a free, liberal person. Sometimes called a “good PARTER.” Any
one who looks twice at his money, or who doesn’t pay it at all, is
called a “bad PARTER.”

~Party~, a person—term in very general use, similar in application to
the German pronoun, MAN, a person, people; “where’s the PARTY as ’ad a’
orter be lookin’ after this ’ere ’oss?” policeman’s inquiry of the wrong
cabman; “old PARTY,” an elderly person. The term is said to have arisen
in our old justice courts, where, to save “his worship” and the clerk of
the court any trouble in exercising their memories with the names of the
different plaintiffs, defendants, and witnesses, the word PARTY was
generally employed. Dean Alford remarked:—

    “The word PARTY for a man is especially offensive. Strange to say,
    the use is not altogether modern. It occurs in the English version
    of the Apocryphal book of Tobit, vi. 7. ‘If an evil spirit trouble
    any, one must make a smoke thereof before the man or the woman, and
    the PARTY shall be no more vexed.’”

In Shakspeare we find the term:—

    “_Stephano._ How now shall this be compassed? Canst thou bring me to
    the PARTY?”—_Tempest_, iii. 2.

This is not the only instance of the word being used by the immortal
bard. “I once heard,” said the Dean just quoted, “a venerable dignitary
pointed out by a railway porter as an old PARTY in a shovel.” The last
word is the vulgar term applied to the peculiar hat worn by clerical
dignitaries.

~Pash~, to strike; now corrupted to BASH, which _see_.—_Shakspeare._

~Paste~, to beat, to thrash vigorously.

~Pasteboard~, a visiting card; “to PASTEBOARD a person,” to drop a card
at an absent person’s house.

~Paste-horn~, the nose. Shoemakers nickname any shopmate with a large
nose “old PASTE-HORN,” from the shape of the horn in which they keep
their paste.

~Pasty~, a bookbinder.

~Patch.~ This old English term of reproach, long obsolete in polite
language, may yet occasionally be heard in sentences like these:—“Why,
he’s not a PATCH upon him,” _i.e._, he is not to be compared with him;
“one’s not a PATCH on the other,” &c. Shakspeare uses the word in the
sense of a paltry fellow:—

    “What a pied ninny’s this? thou scurvy PATCH!”

In old English PATCH meant a fool, a wearer of patched clothes of
motley.

~Patent coats~, the first coat, with the pockets inside the skirt, were
so termed.

~Patter~, a speech or discourse, a pompous street oration, a judge’s
summing up, a trial. Ancient word for muttering. Probably from the
_Latin_, PATERNOSTER, or Lord’s Prayer. This was said, before the
Reformation, in a “low voice” by the priest, until he came to “and lead
us not into temptation,” to which the choir responded, “but deliver us
from evil.” In the reformed Prayer Book this was altered, and the Lord’s
Prayer directed to be said “with a _loud voice_.” Dr. Pusey takes this
view of the derivation in his _Letter to the Bishop of London_, p. 78,
1851. Scott uses the word twice, in _Ivanhoe_ and the _Bride of
Lammermoor_.

~Patter~, to talk. PATTER FLASH, to speak the language of thieves, talk
cant.

~Patteran~, a gipsy trail, made by throwing down a handful of grass
occasionally, especially where they have turned off from the main road.

~Patter-crib~, a flash house.

~Patterer~, one of a race now nearly defunct, who cried last dying
speeches, &c., in the streets. The term is also applied to those who
help off their wares by long harangues in the public thoroughfares.
These men, to use their own term, “are the aristocracy of the street
sellers,” and despise the costermongers for their ignorance, boasting
that they live by their intellect, which, as they do not live
wonderfully well, is no particularly wise boast.

~Pattern~, a common vulgar phrase for “patent.”

~Paul Pry~, an inquisitive person. From the well-known comedy.

~Paw~, the hand. PAW-CASES, gloves. Boots are in some parts of Ireland
called “gloves for the feet.”

~Pay~, to beat a person, or “serve him out.” Originally a nautical term,
meaning to stop the seams of a vessel with pitch (_French_, POIX);
“here’s the d‑‑‑‑l to PAY, and no pitch hot,” said when any catastrophe
occurs which there is no means of averting; “to PAY over face and eyes,
as the cat did the monkey;” “to PAY through the nose,” to give a
ridiculous price,—an expressive phrase of which no one seems to know
the origin. Shakspeare uses PAY in the sense of to beat or thrash.

~Pay~, to deliver. “PAY that letter to Mr. So-and-so” is a very common
direction to a Chinese servant.—_Anglo-Chinese._

~Pay-away~, “go on with your story, or discourse.” From the nautical
phrase PAY-AWAY, meaning to allow a rope to run out of a vessel. When
the hearer considers the story quite long enough, he, carrying out the
same metaphor, exclaims “hold on.”

~Peach~, an informer against omnibus conductors and drivers, one
especially hired by the proprietors to count passengers and stoppages.
The term is in frequent use amongst omnibus-men. This is about the only
instance known of the verb being used as a substantive.

~Peach~, to inform against or betray. Webster states that the word
“impeach” is now mostly used, and that PEACH is confined principally to
the conversation of thieves and the lower orders. The word was
originally “impeach,” though it was never until lately used in the same
way as its abridgment.

~Peacock horse~, amongst undertakers, is one with a showy tail and mane,
which holds its head up well. PEACOCKY refers to an objectionable high
action among racehorses.

~Peaking~, remnants of cloth. Term amongst drapers and cloth
warehousemen.

~Peaky~, sickly, delicate.

~Pec~, a term used by the Eton boys for money, an abbreviation, of
course, of the _Latin_ PECUNIA.

~Peck~, food; “PECK and boose,” meat and drink.—_Lincolnshire._
_Ancient Cant_, PEK, meat.

~Peck~, to eat voraciously. A hearty eater is generally called “a rare
PECKER.” Originally PECK was to eat delicately, “but we have changed all
that now.”

~Peck-alley~, the throat.

~Pecker~, “keep your PECKER up,” _i.e._, don’t get down in the
mouth,—literally, keep your beak or head well up, “never say die!”

~Peckham~, a facetious usage of the name of this district, implying a
dinner; “all holiday at PECKHAM,” _i.e._, nothing to eat.

~Peckish~, hungry. _Old Cant_, PECKIDGE, meat.

~Peel~, to strip, or disrobe.—_Sporting._

~Peeler~, a policeman; so called from Sir Robert Peel (_see_ BOBBY);
properly applied to the Irish Constabulary rather than the Metropolitan
Police, the former force having been established by Sir Robert Peel.

~Peepers~, eyes; “painted PEEPERS,” eyes bruised or blackened from a
blow.—_Pugilistic._

~Peery~, suspicious, or inquisitive.

~Peg~, brandy and soda-water. A PEG by which to pull oneself up again.
Also, a shilling.—_Scotch._

~Peg~, “to PEG away,” to strike, run, or drive away; “PEG a hack,” to
drive a cab; “to take him down a PEG or two,” to check an arrogant or
conceited person,—possibly derived from the use of PEG tankards. _See_
PIN.

~Peg~, to drink frequently; generally used in reference to devotees of
“S. and B.”

~Peggers~, people who constantly stimulate themselves by means of brandy
and soda-water.

~Pegtops~, the loose trousers in fashion some years back, small at the
ankle and swelling upwards, in imitation of the Zouave costume.

~Penang-lawyer~, a long cane, sometimes carried by a footman.
PENANG-LAWYERS are also bludgeons which are carried by all classes in
Singapore.

~Pencil-fever~, a supposititious disease among racehorses, the
preliminary symptoms of which show that an animal has been pretty
considerably “milked.” PENCIL-FEVER sets in when, despite the efforts of
the “marketeers,” a horse can no longer be kept at a short price in the
lists, through his actual condition being discovered, and when every
layer of odds is anxious to write his name down. This disorder is also
called “milk-fever,” “market-fever,” and other suggestive names.

~Penny-a-liner~, a contributor of local news, accidents, fires, and
scandals to a newspaper; a man not regularly “on the paper;” one who is
popularly believed to be paid for each contribution at the rate of a
penny a line, and whose interest is, therefore, that his articles should
be stuffed with fine words and long sentences. This wonderful person, to
whom so much is daily attributed, is now generally called a LINER.

~Penny dreadfuls~, an expressive term for those penny publications which
depend more upon sensationalism than upon merit, artistic or literary,
for success.

~Penny gaff~, a shop turned into a temporary theatre (admission one
penny), at which dancing and singing take place every night. Sometimes
rude pictures of the performers are arranged outside to give the front a
gaudy and attractive look, and at night-time coloured lamps and
transparencies are displayed to draw an audience. Zest is given to these
entertainments by the fact that now and again the police make raids upon
the houses, and carry off both actors and spectators. These places are
also called “dukeys,” for no reason that can be discovered. _See_ GAFF.

~Penny starver~, a penny roll. _See_ BUSTER.

~Pen’orth~, value for money; as, “I’ll have my PEN’ORTH,”—given
irrespective of the actual amount.

~Pensioner~, a man of the most degraded condition who lives off the
miserable earnings of a prostitute. There is an unmentionable prefix to
the word PENSIONER. _See_ PONCE.

~Pepper~, to thrash, or strike.—_Pugilistic_, but used by
Shakspeare.—_Eastern Counties._

~Pepper-boxes~, the buildings of the Royal Academy and National Gallery
in Trafalgar Square. The name was first given by a wag, in allusion to
the cupolas erected by Wilkins, the architect, upon the roof, which,
from their form and awkward appearance, at a distance suggest to the
stranger the fact of their being enlarged PEPPER-BOXES. _See_ BOILERS.

~Perch~, or ROOST, a resting-place; “I’m off to PERCH,” _i.e._, I am
going to bed.

    “Nor yet a single perch, for which my lucky stars to thank,
    Except the _perch_ I’ve taken on this damp rheumatic bank.”

        _Lay of the Unsuccessful Angler._

~Perform~, to carry out a design, generally a dishonest one. To “PERFORM
on a flat” is to cozen a fool.

~Perkin~, beer. Dandy or affected shortening of the widely-known firm,
Barclay and Perkins.

~Perpendicular~, a lunch taken standing-up at a tavern bar. It is usual
to call it lunch, often as the PERPENDICULAR may take the place of
dinner.

~Persuaders~, spurs.

~Pesky~, an intensitive expression, implying annoyance; as, “A PESKY,
troublesome fellow.” Corruption of PESTILENT; or, _Irish_, PEASGACH,
rough, rugged. PESKY has now become more American than English. _Pesky
Ike_ is the name of a popular American drama.

~Peter~, a partridge.—_Poacher’s term._

~Peter~, a bundle, or valise. Also, a cash-box.

~Peter~, to run short, or give out.—_American._

~Peter Funk~, an American term for a spurious auction or “knock-out.”

~Peter Grievous~, a miserable, melancholy fellow; a croaker.

~Petticoat~, a woman.

~Pewter~, money, like “tin,” used generally to signify silver; also a
tankard. “Let me have my beer in the PEWTER,” is a common request to
waiters, made by “City” men, and others who affect habits of rude
health. The pots for which rowing men contend are often called PEWTERS.

~Philadelphia-lawyer~, a Transatlantic limb of the law considered to be
the very acme of acuteness. Sailors relate many stories of his artful
abilities, none, however, short enough to find a place here. The phrase,
“Enough to puzzle a PHILADELPHIA-LAWYER,” means, enough to puzzle the
sharpest man in the world.

~Philander~, to ramble on incoherently; to write discursively and
weakly.

~Philip~, a policeman. The word is loudly given as a signal that the
police are approaching.

~Philiper~, a thief’s accomplice, one who stands by and looks out for
the police while the others commit a robbery, and who calls out
“Philip!” when any one approaches.

~Philistine~, a policeman. The German students call all townspeople not
of their body “Philister,” as ours say “cads.” The departing student
says, mournfully, in one of the Burschenlieder—

    “Muss selber nun PHILISTER sein!”

_i.e._, “I must now myself PHILISTINE be!” Also, a man who is of a set
opposed to one’s own. Society is supposed to regard all outside its
bounds as belonging to the PHILISTINE world. Bohemians regard all
cleanly, orderly people who conform to conventionality as PHILISTINES.

~Physog~, or PHIZ, the face. Swift uses the latter word. Corruption of
PHYSIOGNOMY.

~Picaroon~, a pirate or buccaneer originally; now an ordinary thief.

~Piccadilly butchers~, a satirical name applied by the crowd to the
regiment of Horse Guards, known as the “Royal Blues,” from their savage
onslaught upon the crowd on the occasion of the arrest of Sir Francis
Burdett at his house in Piccadilly, by order of the Speaker of the House
of Commons. _See_ CHEESEMONGERS.

~Piccadilly weepers~, long carefully combed-out whiskers of the
Dundreary fashion.

~Pick~, “to PICK oneself up,” to recover after a beating or illness,
sometimes varied to “PICK up one’s crumbs;” “to PICK a man up,” “to do,”
or cheat him.

~Pickaninny~, a young child is thus styled by the West Indian negroes.
The word is now completely naturalized among sailors and water-side
people in England.

~Pickers~, the hands.—_Shakspeare._

~Pickle~, a miserable or comical position; “he is in a sad PICKLE,” said
of any one who has fallen into the gutter, or got besmeared. “A PICKLE
herring,” a comical fellow, a merry-andrew.—_Old._ Also, a mischievous
boy; “what a PICKLE he is, to be sure!” Derived from his always getting
into a PICKLE, or mess.

~Pickles!~ gammon; also a jeering and insulting exclamation.

~Pick-me-up~, a revivifying drink taken after a debauch; a tonic.

~Piece~, a contemptuous term for a woman; a strumpet.—_Shakspeare._ Not
always objectionable nowadays. A “barber’s clerk” does not object to
hear his sweetheart or wife called “a nice PIECE;” and gentlemen of the
counter-jumping fraternity describe their “young ladies” as “nice PIECES
of goods.”

~Pieman.~ In tossing, the man who cries is called the PIEMAN. In the old
days when the itinerant PIEMAN’S duty was to toss or sell, and his call
was, “Hot pies, toss or buy, toss or buy,” he was always supposed to be
entitled to the cry, the intending eater “skying the copper.” An active
and efficient police have, however, improved tossing—so far, at all
events, as PIEMEN and poor people are concerned—off the face of the
earth, and gaming of all descriptions is now a luxury confined to the
rich.

~Pig~, a mass of metal,—so called from its being poured in a fluid
state from a SOW, which _see_.—_Workman’s term._

~Pig~, a policeman; an informer. The word is now almost exclusively
applied by London thieves to a plain-clothes man, or a “nose.”

~Pig~, a pressman in a printing office. _See_ DONKEY.

~Pig~, or SOW’S BABY, a sixpence.

~Pig~, to live in a crowded, filthy manner. The lower orders of Irish
are said to PIG together. A suggestive, if not elegant, expression.

~Pig and Tinder-box~, the vulgar rendering of the well-known tavern
sign, “Elephant and Castle.”

~Pigeon~, a gullible or soft person. The _French_ cant, or _Argot_, has
the word PIGEON, dupe—“PECHON, PESCHON DE RUBY, apprenti gueux, enfant
(sans doute dérobé)”. The vagabonds and brigands of Spain also used the
word in their _Germania_, or robbers’ language, PALOMO (PIGEON),
ignorant, simple. In the sporting world sharps and flats are often
called “rooks and PIGEONS” respectively—sometimes “spiders and flies.”

~Pigeon~, business, simply the Chinese pronunciation of the English
word.—_Anglo-Chinese._

~Pigeon-English~, the English spoken by the natives of Canton and other
parts of China.

~Pigeon-flying~, or BLUEY CRACKING, breaking into empty houses and
stealing lead.

~Pigeon’s milk~, an imaginary fluid for which boys and simpletons are
frequently sent on the 1st of April.

~Pig-headed~, obstinate.

~Pig’s eye~, the ace of diamonds in cards.

~Pig’s whisper~, a low or inaudible whisper; also a short space of time,
synonymous with “cockstride,” _i.e._, cock’s tread.

~Pike~, a turnpike; “to bilk a PIKE,” to cheat the keeper of the
toll-gate. Mr. Tony Weller makes many amusing remarks on PIKES and
PIKE-keepers. Since the first edition of this work was published, PIKES
and PIKE-keepers have departed from amongst us, so far as London and its
immediate vicinity are concerned.

~Pike~, to run, to be off with speed.

~Pike it~, is said as a hasty and contemptuous, if not angry, dismissal,
“if you don’t like it, take a short stick and PIKE it.” This is but a
form of the attempts at rhyming smartness common in London.

    “Joe quickly his sand had sold, sir,
      And Bess got a basket of rags;
    Then up to St. Giles’s they roll’d, sir;
      To every bunter Bess brags.
    Then unto the gin-shop they PIKE IT,
      And Bess was admitted, we hear;
    For none of the crew dare but like it,
      As Joey, her kiddy, was there,”

        _The Sand-man’s Wedding_, a Cantata.

    “’Twas not our fault, dear Jack; we saw the watch going into the
    house the moment we came there, and we thought it proper to PIKE
    OFF.”—_The Prison Breaker_, a Farce.

~Pikey~, a tramp or gipsy. A PIKEY-cart is in various parts of the
country one of those habitable vehicles suggestive of a wandering life.
Possibly the term has reference to one who constantly uses the PIKE, or
turnpike road.

~Pile~, a sum of money; generally the whole of a man’s private means. A
term originally peculiar to Californian miners, in reference to their
accumulated dust and nuggets. American gamblers speak of “putting all
the PILE on” when they fancy anything very much. “To go the whole PILE”
runs level with our sporting phrase, “To go a raker.”

~Pill~, a doctor.—_Military._ PILL-DRIVER, a peddling apothecary.

~Pill~, to blackball a man at a club. Sometimes a man who is blackballed
is described as having received too much medicine.

~Pill-box~, a doctor’s carriage.

~Pin~, “to put in the PIN,” to refrain from drinking. From the ancient
peg tankard, which was furnished with a row of PINS, or pegs, to
regulate the amount which each person was to drink. Drunken people are
often requested to “put in the PIN,” from some remote connexion between
their unsteadiness and that of a carriage wheel which has lost its
linch-PIN. The popular cry, “Put in the PIN,” can have no connexion with
the drinking PIN or peg now, whatever it may originally have had. A
MERRY PIN, a roysterer. _See_ PEG.

~Pinch~, to steal or cheat; also, to catch, or apprehend.

~Pinchbeck~, inferior, deteriorated. Anything pretending to more than
its proper value is said to be PINCHBECK.

    “Where, in these PINCHBECK days, can we hope to find the old
    agricultural virtue in all its purity?”—_Framley Parsonage._

PINCHBECK was an inferior metal, compounded of copper and zinc, to
resemble gold. It was very fashionable in the last century, and derived
its name from a Mr. PINCHBECK, a well-known London tradesman, who
manufactured watches, buckles, and other articles out of it. PINCHBECK
first obtained his notoriety by the invention of an ingenious
candle-snuffers, which the author of _The Heroic Epistle to Sir William
Chambers_ made the vehicle of a facetious Ode that went through eight
editions. The title of this _jeu d’esprit_ ran thus:—

    “_Ode to Mr. Pinchbeck, upon his Newly-invented Candle-Snuffers, by_
    MALCOLM M’GREGOR, Esq., 1776.

    “Illustrious PINCHBECK! condescend,
    Thou well-beloved, and best king’s friend,
    These lyric lines to view;
    Oh, may they prompt thee, ere too late,
    To snuff the candle of the State,
    That burns a little blue!”

PINCHBECK published a poetical reply, and the two pamphlets were for a
long time the talk of the town.

~Pink~, the acme of perfection. The scarlet garb worn in the
hunting-field.

~Pink~, to stab, or pierce. In the days of rapier-wearing a professed
duellist was said to be “a regular PINKER and driller.”

~Pinnel~, or PENNEL,—corruption of penal servitude. As, “four-year
PINNEL.”

~Pinner-up~, a seller of old songs, pinned against a wall or framed
canvas. Formerly many of these street salesmen carried on their little
“paper trade” in London. There are but one or two now left.

~Pins~, legs.

~Pipe~, to follow or dog a person; to watch, to notice.

~Pipe~, to shed tears, or bewail; “PIPE one’s eye.”—_Sea term._

    “He first began to eye his pipe.
    And then to PIPE his eye.”—_Hood._

Metaphor from the boatswain’s pipe, which calls to duty.

~Pipe~, “to put one’s PIPE out,” to traverse his plans, “to take a rise”
out of him. When any one meets with a rebuff or a sharp answer, he is
often told to “put that in his PIPE and smoke it,” _i.e._, to digest it
carefully.

~Piper~, a person employed by an omnibus proprietor to act as a spy on
the conductor.

~Piper~, a broken-winded hack horse.

~Pipkin~, the stomach,—properly, an earthen round-bottomed
pot—_Norwich._

~Pips~, the marks, no matter of what suit, on playing cards. The ace is
often called “single PIP.”

~Pit~, a breast-pocket.

~Pitch~, a fixed locality where a patterer can hold forth to a gaping
multitude for at least some few minutes continuously; “to do a PITCH in
the drag,” to perform in the street. An itinerant is said to “make a
PITCH” whenever he attempts to do any business.

~Pitch~, to utter base coin. Smashers are known to themselves and their
friends, the rest of the dangerous classes, as “snide PITCHERS.” The
confederacy is divided into makers, buyers, holders, and pitchers. The
maker probably never sees the actual passers of base money, the buyer
being generally the intercommunicating medium. The holder is generally a
man who carries the bulk of the “snides,” and waits about; while the
pitcher, often a woman—indeed, more often than not—runs the actual
risk.

~Pitch~, to go to bed for less than the ordinary period. Journeymen
bakers, and others whose work is disjointed, call any short interval of
sleep a PITCH. Probably from the action.

~Pitch into~, to fight; “PITCH INTO him, Bill,” _i.e._, give him a
thrashing.

~Pitch the fork~, to tell a pitiful tale.

~Pitch the nob~, PRICK THE GARTER, which _see_.

~Place~, to name the first three horses in a race. This is the duty of
the judge, who sees nothing of the race but the finish. Sometimes an
official will place more than the first three, but this in no way
interferes with the meaning of the word as generally received. To run
“nowhere” is to be unplaced.

~Place~, first, second, or third position in a race. Sometimes a PLACE
is called a “situation” or a “shop.”

~Plant~, a dodge, a preconcerted swindle; a position in the street to
sell from. All bearings-up, bonnetings, and such like arrangements, are
the results of preconcerted schemes or PLANTS.

~Plant~, to mark a person out for plunder or robbery; to conceal or hide
money, &c.—_Old Cant._ In the sense of conceal, there is a similar word
in _Argot_, PLANQUER.

~Plant~, a hidden store of money or variables. To “spring a PLANT” is to
unearth another person’s hoard.

~Platform~, a standpoint in an argument, a statement of political or
general opinion. “Home rule’s my PLATFORM!” Originally _American_, but
now general.

~Play~, to strike for higher wages, to be out of work.—_North._

~Plebs~, a term used to stigmatize a tradesman’s son at Westminster
School. _Latin_, PLEBS, the vulgar.

~Plough.~ To be PLOUGHED is to fail to pass an examination. About
twenty years ago “pluck,” the word then used, began to be superseded
by PLOUGH. It is said to have arisen from a man who could not supply
the examiner with any quotation from Scripture, until at last he
blurted out, “And the ploughers ploughed on my back, and made long
furrows.”—_University._

~Ploughed~, drunk.

~Pluck~, the heart, liver, and lungs of an animal,—all that is PLUCKED
away in connexion with the windpipe, from the chest of a sheep or hog.

~Pluck~, to turn back at a University examination. The supposed origin
of PLUCK is, that when, on degree day, the proctor, after having read
the name of a candidate for a degree, walks down the hall and back, it
is to give any creditor the opportunity of plucking his sleeve, and
informing him of the candidate’s being in debt.

~Pluck~, courage, valour, stoutness. _See following._

~Plucked un~, a stout or brave fellow; “he’s a rare PLUCKED UN,” _i.e._,
he dares face anything.

During the Crimean War and the Indian Mutiny PLUCKY, signifying
courageous, became a favourite term even among ladies; and the term
British PLUCK will probably live—slangy as is its origin—as long as
the language into which it has been adopted, for the history of the
deeds with which it is associated can never die, while, indeed, a
history remains to this country. The word met with great disfavour at
first from the “genteel,” but of course they followed when aristocracy
deigned to use it.

~Plum~, £100,000, usually applied to the dowry of a rich heiress, to a
legacy, or to a sum made in business or by a lucky speculation.

~Plum-cash~, prime cost.—_Anglo-Chinese._

~Plummy~, round, sleek, jolly, or fat; excellent, very good, first-rate.

~Plumper~, a single vote at an election, not a “split ticket.”

~Plunder~, a common word in the horse trade to express profit. Also an
American term for baggage, luggage. In Lower Canada the French packmen
call luggage “butin.”

~Plunger~, a heavy cavalry-man.—_Military slang._

~Plutocracy~, the wealthy classes. The Manchester merchants are often
termed a millocracy, and words of a similar character are mobocracy and
moneyocracy.

~Pocket~, to put up with. A man who does not resent an affront is said
to POCKET it.

~Pocket-pistol~, a dram-flask.

~Podgy~, drunk; dumpy, short, and fat.

~Pogram~, a Dissenter, a fanatic, formalist, or humbug. So called from a
well-known enthusiast of this name.

~Poke~, a bag, or sack; “to buy a pig in a POKE,” to purchase anything
without seeing it. POKE was originally a pocket. Shakspeare says—

    “And then he pulled a dial from his POKE.”

~Poke.~ “Come, none of your POKING fun at me,” _i.e._, you must not
laugh at me.

~Poker.~ “By the holy POKER and the tumbling Tom!” an Irish oath.

~Pokers~, or SILVER POKERS, the Bedels of the Vice-Chancellor, who carry
silver maces, and accompany him through the streets. They are also
officers of his court.—_University._

    “Around, around, all, all around.
      On seats with velvet lined,
    Sat Heads of Houses in a row,
      And Deans and College Dons below,
    With a POKER or two behind.”

        _Rime of the New-made Baccalere_, 1841.

~Poky~, confined or cramped; “that corner is POKY and narrow.”
Housewives describe a small uncomfortable room as “a POKY hole.”
_Saxon_, POKE, a sack.

~Policeman~, a fly—more especially the kind known as “blue bottle.”
Also, among the dangerous classes, a man who is unworthy of confidence,
a sneak or mean fellow.

~Polish off~, to finish off anything quickly—a dinner, for instance;
also to finish off an adversary.—_Pugilistic._

~Poll~, at Cambridge, the “ordinary degree” candidates for the B.A.
Examination, who do not aspire to the “Honours” list. From the _Greek_,
οἱ πόλλοι, “the many.”

~Poll~, to beat or distance, as in a race; to utterly vanquish in
competition. Term much used by printers.

~Poll~, a female of unsteady character; “POLLED up,” means living with a
woman in a state of unmarried impropriety. Also, if a costermonger sees
one of his friends walking with a strange woman, he will say to him on
the earliest opportunity, “I saw yer when yer was POLLED up.”

~Poll~, or POLLING, one thief robbing another of part of the booty. In
use in ancient times, _vide Hall’s Union_, 1548.

~Poll parrot~, a talkative, gossiping woman. A term much used about
Ratcliff Highway.

~Polony~, Cockney shortening and vulgar pronunciation of Bologna
(sausage). The sausages which are sold under the name of POLONIES have,
however, no nearer connexion with Bologna sausages than that of the
word’s derivation.

~Pompadours~, the Fifty-sixth Regiment of Foot in the British army.

~Ponce~, a degraded man who lives upon a woman’s prostitution. Low-class
East-end thieves even will “draw the line” at PONCES, and object to
their presence in the boozing-kens.

~Pond~, or HERRING-POND, the sea; so called by those who were sent
across it at the national expense.

~Ponge~, or PONGELOW, beer, half-and-half; the term is also used as a
verb, as in the Cockney phrase, “let’s PONGELOW, shall we?”

~Pony~, twenty-five pounds.—_Sporting._

~Poona~, a sovereign. Corruption of “pound;” or from the _Lingua
Franca_.

~Pop~, to pawn or pledge; “to POP up the spout,” to pledge at the
pawnbroker’s,—an allusion to the spout up which the brokers send the
ticketed articles until such times as they shall be redeemed. The spout
runs from the ground-floor to the wareroom at the top of the house.
Ginger-beer is also known as POP.

~Pop the question~, to make an offer of marriage.

~Pope’s-eye~, a peculiar little part in a leg of mutton, much esteemed
by lovers of that joint.

~Pope’s nose~, the extremity of the rump of a roast fowl, sometimes
devilled as a dainty for epicures. Also known as “the parson’s NOSE.”

~Pops~, pocket-pistols.

~Porterhouse steak~, an American term for a steak which contains a small
bone. In the States, tender-loin steaks are much eaten. These are from
what we call the undercut of the sirloin.

~Portrait~, a sovereign. Modification of “Queen’s picture.”

~Posa~, a treasurer. A corruption of “purser,” the name given
to the treasurer in the large Anglo-Chinese mercantile
establishments.—_Anglo-Chinese._

~Posh~, a halfpenny, or trifling coin. Also a generic term for money.

~Post~, to pay down; “POST the pony” signifies to place the stakes
played for on the table.

~Post-horn~, the nose. _See_ PASTE-HORN.

~Post-mortem~, at Cambridge, the second examination which men who have
been “plucked” have to undergo.—_University._

~Posted up~, well acquainted with the subject in question, “up to the
mark,”—metaphor drawn from the counting-house.

~Pot~, a favourite in the betting for a race. Probably so called because
it is usual to say that a heavily-backed horse carries “a POT of money.”
When a favourite is beaten the POT is said to be upset.

~Pot~, a sixpence, _i.e._, the price of a POT or quart of half-and-half.
A half-crown, in medical student slang, is a FIVE-POT piece.

~Pot~, TO GO TO POT, to die; from the classic custom of putting the
ashes of the dead in an urn; also, to be ruined or broken up,—often
applied to tradesmen who fail in business. “Go to POT!” _i.e._, go and
hang yourself, shut up and be quiet.—_L’Estrange._ “To put the POT on,”
to overcharge or exaggerate. “To go to POT” most probably means to go
out of all shape, as metal in the melting-pot.

~Pot~, to finish; “don’t POT me,” term used at billiards, when a player
holes his adversary’s ball—generally considered shabby play. This word
was much used by our soldiers in the Crimea in reference to shots from a
hole or ambush. These were called POT-SHOTS. The term is still used to
denote a shot taken sitting or at ease.

~Pot-boiler~, a picture hurriedly painted for the purpose of “keeping
the POT BOILING.”—_Artistic slang._

~Pot-faker~, a hawker of crockery and general earthenware.

~Pot-hat~, a low-crowned hat, as distinguished from the soft wideawake
and the stove-pipe.

~Pot-hunter~, a sportsman who shoots anything he comes across, having
more regard to filling his bag than to the rules which regulate the
sport. A man who fires at anything, regardless of the rules which govern
true sportsmen.

~Pot-hunter~, a man who gives his time up to rowing or punting, or
any sort of match in order to win the “pewters” which are given as
prizes.—_University._ The term is now much used in aquatic and athletic
circles; and is applied, in a derogatory sense, to men of good quality
who enter themselves in small races they are almost sure to win, and
thus deprive the juniors of small trophies which should be above the
attention of champions, though valuable to beginners. Also an unwelcome
guest, who manages to be just in time for dinner.

~Pot-luck~, just as it comes; to take POT-LUCK, _i.e._, one’s chance of
a dinner, or of what there is for dinner. A hearty term, used to signify
that whatever the pot contains the visitor is welcome to.

~Pot-valiant~, courageous through application to the bottle. Possessed
of Dutch courage.

~Pot-walloper~, an elector in certain boroughs before the passing
of the first Reform Bill, whose qualification consisted in being a
housekeeper,—to establish which it was only necessary to boil a pot
within the limits of the borough, by the aid of any temporary erection.
This implied that he was able to provide for himself, and not
necessitated to apply for parochial relief. Honiton, Tregoney,
Ilchester, Old Sarum, &c., had this privilege before the passing of the
first Reform Bill. Also, a scullion.

~Potato-trap~, the mouth.—Originally a Hibernicism.

~Potheen~, whisky made in an illicit still, once a favourite drink in
Ireland, now almost unattainable. People resident in England who read of
the charms of POTHEEN would be rather astonished if they were to taste
it. It is real “fire-water” flavoured with peat-smoke.

~Potted~, or POTTED OUT, cabined, confined, figurative of crammed into a
garden-pot. Also applied to burial,—a horticultural allusion.

~Potter~, to meddle without much judgment. Application various. A
gentleman may describe himself as “POTTERING about in his garden,” and
think the phrase pleasant. The gardener, who has to do the work all over
again, may, however, use the word in quite a different sense.

~Power~, a large quantity; “a POWER of money.”—_Irish_ at first, but
now general.

~Pow-wow~, a conference. Originally an Indian term.

~Prad~, a horse. PRAD-NAPPING was horse-stealing. Both these terms are
old cant.

~Prancer~, a horse.—_Ancient Cant._ In modern slang an officer of
cavalry.

~Praties~, potatoes.—_Irish._

~Precious~, used, in a slang sense, like very or exceeding; “a PRECIOUS
little of that,” _i.e._, a very little indeed; a PRECIOUS humbug,
rascal, &c., _i.e._, an eminent one.

~Pretty horsebreakers~, a phrase adopted some years back, in deference
to common squeamishness, to denote the _demi-monde_, who dress so well
and ride so daintily. Really, pretty heartbreakers.

~Prial~, a corruption of PAIR-ROYAL, a term at the game of cribbage,
meaning three cards of a similar description. Often used metaphorically
for three persons or things of a kind. DOUBLE-PRIAL, a corruption of
DOUBLE PAIR-ROYAL, means four cards, persons, or things of a similar
description.

~Prick the garter~, or PITCH THE NOB, a gambling and cheating game
common at fairs, and generally practised by thimble-riggers. It consists
of a GARTER or a piece of list doubled, and then folded up tight. The
bet is made upon your asserting that you can, with a pin, PRICK the
point at which the garter is doubled. The garter is then unfolded, and
nine times out of ten you will find that you have been deceived, and
that one of the false folds has been pricked. The owner of the GARTER
holds the ends tightly with one hand, and there is little doubt that he
can make the “flat” lose and the “bonnet” win at pleasure. This was,
doubtless, originally a gipsy game, and we are informed by Brand that it
was much practised by the gipsies in the time of Shakspeare. In those
days it was termed PRICKING AT THE BELT, or FAST AND LOOSE.

~Prig~, a thief. Used by Addison in the sense of a coxcomb.—_Ancient
Cant_, probably from the _Saxon_, PRICC-AN, to filch, &c.—_Shakspeare._
PRIG, to steal or rob. PRIGGING, thieving. In Scotland the term PRIG is
used in a different sense from what it is in England. In Glasgow, or at
Aberdeen, “to PRIG a salmon” would be to cheapen it, or seek for an
abatement in the price. A story is told of two Scotchmen, visitors to
London, who got into sad trouble a few years ago by announcing their
intention of “PRIGGING a hat” which they had espied in a fashionable
manufacturer’s window, and which one of them thought he would like to
possess.

~Prig~, a conceited, stuck-up, over-knowing person; one who appropriates
or adopts a manner or costume not suited to him.

~Priggish~, conceited.

~Primed~, said of a person in that state of incipient intoxication that
if he took more drink it would become evident. Also, crammed for an
examination.

~Pro~, a professional.—_Theatrical._

~Pro~, the proproctor, or second in command in the proctorial police.
The two proctors generally appoint a certain number of proproctors
each.—_Oxford University._

~Proctorized~, TO BE, to be stopped by the Proctor, and told to call on
him.—_University._

~Prog~, meat, food, &c. Johnson calls it “a low word.” He was fond of
“prog,” however.

~Proof~, the best ale at Magdalen College, Oxford.

~Prop~, a blow. As, “a PROP on the nose,”—more street slang than
pugilistic.

~Prop~, a scarf pin.

~Prop-nailer~, a man who “sneaks,” or rather snatches, pins from
gentlemen’s scarves.

~Proper~, very, exceedingly, sometimes used ironically; “you are a
PROPER nice fellow,” meaning a great scamp. A “PROPER man” generally
means a perfect man, as far as can be known.

~Props~, crutches.

~Props~, stage properties.—_Theatrical._

~Pros~, a water-closet. Abbreviated form of πρὸς τινα τόπον. Some say,
πρὸς τον τόπον.—_Oxford University._

~Pross~, to break in or instruct a stage-infatuated youth. Also, to
spunge upon a comrade or stranger for drink. In this latter capacity the
word is in connexion with prostitute, a PROSSER being considered a most
degraded being, and the word being supposed by many to represent a man
who lives on a woman’s prostitution.

~Psalm-smiter~, a “Ranter,” one who sings at a conventicle. _See_
BRISKET-BEATER.

~Pub~, or PUBLIC, a public-house; “what PUB do you use?” _i.e._, which
inn or public-house do you frequent?

~Public patterers~, swell mobsmen who pretend to be Dissenting
preachers, and harangue in the open air to attract a crowd for their
confederates to rob.

~Pucker~, poor or bad temper, difficulty, _déshabillé_. PUCKER UP, to
get in a bad temper.

~Puckering~, talking privately.

~Puckerow~, to seize, to take hold of. From the _Hindostanee_,
PUCKERNA.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Pudding-snammer~, one who robs a cook-shop.

~Puff~, to blow up, or swell with praise; declared by a writer in the
_Weekly Register_, as far back as 1732, to be illegitimate.

    “PUFF has become a cant word, signifying the applause set forth by
    writers, &c. to increase the reputation and sale of a book, and is
    an excellent stratagem to excite the curiosity of gentle readers.”

Lord Bacon, however, used the word in a similar sense a century before.
Sheridan also seems to have remembered the use of the word, _vide_ Mr.
PUFF.

~Pug~, a fighting man’s idea of the contracted word to be produced from
pugilist.

~Pull~, an advantage, or hold upon another; “I’ve the PULL over (or of)
you,” _i.e._, you are in my power—perhaps an oblique allusion to the
judicial sense. See the following.

~Pull~, to have one apprehended; “to be PULLED up,” or more recently “to
be PULLED” only, to be taken before a magistrate. The police are
constantly “pulling” loitering, furiously driving, or drunken cabmen.

~Pull~, to drink; “come, take a PULL at it,” _i.e._, drink up.

~Pull~, to prevent a horse from winning, that is, so far as the rider’s
action is concerned.

~Pullet~, a young girl. Filly is an exchangeable term.

~Pummel~, to thrash,—from POMMEL.

~Pump~, to extract information by roundabout questioning.

~Pundit~, a person who assumes to be very grave and
learned.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Punkah~, a fan, usually a fan of very large size, worked with a string,
and used to ventilate rooms.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Punt~, to gamble; PUNTING-SHOP, a gambling-house. Common in ancient
writers, but now disused. The word seems confined to playing for
“chicken stakes.” PUNT means now in the sporting world to back horses
for small stakes.

~Punter~, a small professional backer of horses.

~Pup and ringer~, _i.e._, the “Dog and Bell,” the sign of a flash
public-house.

~Purdah~, a curtain.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Pure finders~, street-collectors of dogs’ dung.—_Humorous._

~Purl~, to spill; PURLED is a hunting and steeplechasing term synonymous
with “foaled,” or “spilt” (thrown); “he’ll get PURLED at the rails.”

~Purl~, a mixture of hot ale and sugar, with wormwood infused in it, a
favourite morning drink to produce an appetite; sometimes with gin and
spice added:—

    “Two penn’orth o’ PURL—
    Good ‘early PURL,’
    ’Gin all the world
    To put your hair into a curl,
    When you feel yourself queer of a mornin’.”

~Purler~, a heavy fall from a horse in the hunting or steeplechasing
field.

~Push~, a robbery or swindle. “I’m in this PUSH,” the notice given by
one magsman to another that he means to “stand in.”

~Push~, a crowd.—_Old Cant._

~Pussey-cats~, corruption of Puseyites, a name constantly, but
improperly, given to the Tractarian party in the Church, from the Oxford
Regius Professor of Hebrew, who by no means approved of the Romanizing
tendencies of some of its leaders. The name still sticks, however, to
this day.

~Put~, a game at cards, once fashionable, but now played among thieves
and costermongers only.

~Put~, an obsolete slang term representing the modern “bloke” or “cove.”
It was generally applied to elderly persons.

~Put on~, to promise another money or valuables in the event of an
anticipated success. “You’re ON a quid if Kaiser wins,” might often have
been heard before last St. Leger. Many hangers-on of the turf live
almost entirely by what they are PUT ON, by bookmakers and backers for
whom they do odd work.

~Put that in your pipe and smoke it~, said of a blow or repartee, and
equivalent to take that and think over it, or digest it, or let it be a
warning to you.

~Put the pot on~, to put too much money upon one horse.—_Sporting._

~Put up~, to suggest, to incite, “he PUT me UP to it;” he prompted me to
do it. PUT UP, to stop at an hotel or a tavern for entertainment.

~Put up~, to inspect or plan out with a view of robbery. To obtain full
particulars with regard to a house and its occupants, so that danger
shall be reduced to a minimum, and the chances of success enlarged.

~Put upon~, cheated, victimized, oppressed.

~Putter up~, a man who travels about for the purpose of obtaining
information useful to professional burglars. A man of this description
will assume many characters, sometimes ingratiating himself with the
master of a house, sometimes with the servants, but all to one end, that
of robbery. He rarely or never joins in the actual burglary, his work
being simply to obtain full particulars as to how, when, and where, for
which he receives his full share of the “swag.”

~Puttun~, regiment.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Pyah~, weak, useless, paltry. This word, much in use among sailors, is
evidently derived from the Indian term PARIAH, signifying the lowest
caste of Hindoos. Thus the Pariah dogs in India are termed PYAH dogs;
and the Pariah descendants of the old Portuguese settlers are called
PYAH Portuguese. Sailors term the natives of St. Helena—a
wretched-looking set of individuals—PYAH Englishmen.

~Pygostole~, the least irreverent of names for the peculiar M. B. coats
worn by Tractarian curates:—

    “It is true that the wicked make sport
      Of our PYGOSTOLES, as we go by;
    And one gownsman, in Trinity Court,
      Went so far as to call me a ‘Guy.’”

_See_ M. B.

~Pyjands~, a kind of drawers or loose pantaloons.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Quad.~ _See_ QUOD.

~Quaker~, a lump of excrement.

~Quality~, gentry, the upper classes.

~Quandary~, described in the dictionaries as a “low word,” may fittingly
be given here. It illustrates, like “hocus-pocus,” and other compound
colloquialisms, the singular origin of slang expressions. QUANDARY, a
dilemma, a doubt, a difficulty, is from the French, QU’EN
DIRAI-JE?—_Skinner._

~Quartereen~, a farthing.—_Gibraltar term._ _Italian_, QUATTRINO.

~Quaver~, a musician.

~Quean~, a strumpet. In Scotland, a lower-class woman. _Saxon_, CWEAN, a
barren old cow.

~Queen Bess~, the Queen of Clubs,—perhaps because that queen, history
says, was of a swarthy complexion.—_North Hants._ _See Gentleman’s
Magazine for 1791_, p. 141.

~Queen’s tobacco-pipe~, the kiln in which all contraband tobacco seized
by the Custom-house officers is burned.

~Queer~, an old cant word, once in continual use as a prefix, signifying
base, roguish, or worthless,—the opposite of RUM, which signified good
and genuine. QUEER, in all probability, is immediately derived from the
cant language. It has been mooted that it came into use from a _quære_
(?) being set before a man’s name; but it is more than probable that it
was brought into this country, by the gipsies, from Germany, where QUER
signifies “cross” or “crooked.” At all events it is believed to have
been first used in England as a cant word.

~Queer~, “to QUEER a flat,” to puzzle or confound a “gull,” or silly
fellow.

    “Who in a row like Tom could lead the van,
      Booze in the ken, or at the spellken hustle?
    Who QUEER a flat,” &c.—_Don Juan_, xi. 19.

~Queer bail~, worthless persons who for a consideration formerly stood
bail for any one in court. Insolvent Jews generally performed this
office, which gave rise to the term JEW-BAIL, otherwise STRAW BAIL.

~Queer-bit-makers~, coiners.

~Queer cuffen~, a justice of the peace, or magistrate,—a very ancient
term, mentioned in the earliest slang dictionary. In this sense, as well
as in that of the verb just given, the term is evidently derived from
_quæro_, to inquire, to question. Quiz and _quis?_ have also an
undoubted connexion.

~Queer-soft~, bad notes.

~Queer-street~, “in QUEER STREET,” in difficulty or in want.

~Querier~, a chimney-sweep who calls from house to house soliciting
employment,—formerly termed KNULLER, which _see_.

~Qui-hi~, an English resident at Calcutta.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Quick sticks~, in a hurry, rapidly; “to cut QUICK STICKS,” to start off
hurriedly, or without more ado. _See_ CUT ONE’S STICK.

~Quid~, or THICK UN, a sovereign; “half a QUID,” half a sovereign;
QUIDS, money generally; “QUID for a QUOD,” one good turn for another.
The word is used by old French writers:—

    “Des testamens qu’on dit le maistre
    De mon fait n’aura QUID ne QUOD.”

        _Grand testament de Villon._

~Quid~, a small piece of tobacco—one mouthful. _Quid est hoc?_ asked
one, tapping the swelled cheek of another; _Hoc est quid_, promptly
replied the other, exhibiting at the same time a “chaw” of the weed. CUD
is probably a corruption. Derivation, _O. F._, or _Norman_, QUIDER, to
ruminate.

~Quid-nunc~, an inquisitive person, always seeking for news. The words
translated simply signify, “What now?”

~Quiet~, “on the QUIET,” clandestinely, so as to avoid observation,
“under the rose.”

~Quill-driver~, a scrivener, a clerk,—satirical phrase similar to
“steel bar driver,” a tailor.

~Quiller~, a parasite, a person who sucks neatly through a quill. _See_
SUCK UP.

~Quilt~, to thrash, or beat.

~Quisby~, bankrupt, poverty-stricken. Amplification of QUEER.

~Quisi~, roguish, low, obscene.—_Anglo-Chinese._

~Qui-tam~, a solicitor. _He who_, _i.e._, “he who, as much for himself
as for the King,” seeks a conviction, the penalty for which goes half to
the informer and half to the Crown. The term would, therefore, with
greater propriety, be applied to a spy than to a solicitor.

~Quiz~, a prying person, an odd fellow. Originally Oxford slang, but now
general, and lately admitted into some dictionaries. _See_ QUEER CUFFEN.

~Quiz~, to pry, or joke; to hoax.

~Quizzical~, jocose, humorous.

~Quizzing-glass~, an eyeglass. This was applied to the old single
eyeglass, which was not stuck in the eye, as now, but was held in the
hand.

~Quockerwodger~, a wooden toy figure which, when pulled by a string,
jerks its limbs about. The term is used in a slang sense, to signify a
pseudo-politician, one whose strings of action are pulled by somebody
else.

~Quod~, a prison, a lock-up; QUODDED, put in prison. QUOD is really a
shortening of quadrangle; so to be QUODDED is to be within four walls.
The expression is, however, seldom used now except to mean in prison. At
Oxford, where it is spelt QUAD, the word has its original signification.

~Quodger~, a contraction, or corruption rather, of the _Latin_ law
phrase, QUO JURE? by what law?—_Legal._

~R. M. D.~, cash down, immediate payment. The initial letters of READY
MONEY DOWN. Another version of this is P. Y. C. (pay your cash), often
seen in the market quotations,—as, “Meat fetched 6_s._ 4_d._ a stone,
P. Y. C., and 6_s._ 6_d._ for the account.”

~Rabbit~, when a person gets the worst of a bargain, he is said “to have
bought the RABBIT.” From an old story about a man selling a cat to a
foreigner for a rabbit.

~Racket~, a dodge, manœuvre, exhibition; a disturbance.

~Rackety~, wild or noisy.

~Racks~, the bones of a dead horse. Term used by horse-slaughterers.

~Raclan~, a married woman. Originally Gipsy, but now a term with English
tramps.

~Rafe~, or RALPH, a pawnbroker’s duplicate.—_Norwich._

~Raff~, a dirty, dissipated fellow; RAFFISH, looking like a RAFF.

~Rag~, to divide or share; “let’s RAG IT,” or “go RAGS,” _i.e._, share
it equally between us.—_Norwich._

~Rag~, a bank-note.

~Rag and Famish~, the Army and Navy Club. From Ensign RAG and Captain
FAMISH, imaginary characters, out of whom Leech some years back obtained
much amusement.

~Rag-shop~, a bank.

~Rag-splawger~, a rich man.

~Ragamuffin~, an ill-clad vagabond, a tatterdemalion.

~Rain napper~, an umbrella.

~Raise the wind~, to obtain credit, or money,—generally by pawning or
selling property, but not unusually by borrowing. Sometimes varied to
WHISTLE UP THE BREEZE.

~Raker~, TO GO A, is, in racing parlance, to put more money than usual
on a certain horse. “Going a RAKER” often leads to “coming a cropper.”

~Ramp~, to hustle, to rob with violence, to levy blackmail in a
ferocious manner; to extort by means of threats. RAMPING is generally
done in gangs.

~Rampage~, TO BE ON THE, on the drink, on the loose. Dickens, in _Great
Expectations_, refers to Mrs. Jo as being on the RAMPAGE when she is
worse tempered than usual.

~Ramper~, a ruffian of the most brutal description, who infests
racecourses and similar places on welching expeditions during summer,
and finds pleasure and profit in garrotte robberies during winter.

~Ramshackle~, queer, rickety, knocked about, as standing corn is after a
high wind. Corrupted from RAM-SHATTER, or possibly from RANSACK.

~Rancho~, originally a Spanish-American word, signifying a
hunting-lodge, or cattle-station, in a wood or desert far from the
haunts of men. A hunting or fishing station in the Highlands or
elsewhere. In Washington, with their accustomed ingenuity in corrupting
words and meanings, the Americans use the appellation for a place of
evil report. The word is generally pronounced RANCH now.

~Randals-man.~ _See_ BILLY.

~Randan~, a boat impelled by three rowers, the midship man sculling, and
the bowman and strokesman rowing with oars.

~Random~, three horses driven in line. _See_ TANDEM, SUDDEN DEATH,
HARUM-SCARUM.

~Randy~, rampant, violent, warm.—_North._ RANDY-BEGGAR, a gipsy tinker.

~Rank~, to cheat. Modification of RAMP.

~Ranker~, a commissioned officer in the army who has risen from the
ranks. Usually employed in a disparaging sense. Purely military. Also,
among street folk, a corruption of RANK DUFFER.

~Ran-tan~, “on the RAN-TAN,” drunk.

~Rantipoll~, a noisy rude girl, a madcap.

~Rap~, a halfpenny; frequently used generically for money, thus:—“I
haven’t a RAP,” _i.e._, I have no money whatever; “I don’t care a RAP,”
&c. Originally a species of counterfeit coin used for small change in
Ireland, against the use of which a proclamation was issued, 5th May,
1737. Small copper or base metal coins are still called RAPPEN in the
Swiss cantons. Irish robbers were formerly termed RAPPAREES.

~Rap~, to utter rapidly and vehemently; “he RAPPED out a volley of
oaths.”

~Rapping~, enormous; “a RAPPING big lie.”

~Rapscallion~, a low tattered wretch—not worth a RAP.

~Raree-show~, a collection of curiosities.

~Rat~, a sneak, an informer, a turn-coat, one who changes his party for
interest. The late Sir Robert Peel was called the RAT, or the TAMWORTH
RATCATCHER, for altering his views on the Roman Catholic question. From
RATS deserting vessels about to sink. The term is often used amongst
printers to denote one who works under price. Old cant for a clergyman.

~Rat~, TO SMELL A, to suspect something, to guess that there is
something amiss.

~Rather!~ a ridiculous street exclamation synonymous with yes; “Do you
like fried chickens?” “RATHER!” “Are you going out of town?” “RATHER!”
Very often pronounced “RAYTHER!”

~Rattening~, the punishment inflicted on non-unionists by Sheffield
grinders, through the instrumentality of “Mary Ann.” _See_ Parliamentary
Inquiry Report on the subject.

~Rattlecap~, an unsteady, volatile person. Generally applied to girls.

~Rattler~, a cab, coach, or cart.—_Old Cant._

~Rattletrap~, the mouth. Anything shaky and mean, but pretentious and
vulgar, is said to belong to the RATTLETRAP order of things.

~Rattling~, jolly, pleasant, well-appointed. “A RATTLING good spread”
means an excellent repast, while a true friend is said to be a “RATTLING
good fellow.”

~Raw~, a tender point, or foible; “to touch a man upon the RAW,” is to
irritate one by alluding to, or joking him on, anything on which he is
peculiarly susceptible or “thin-skinned.” Originally stable slang.

    “Liver and bacon, kidneys, ten pounds one!
    He thinks me RAW. I think I’m rather DONE.”

        _Phantom Barber._

~Raw~, uninitiated; a novice.—_Old._ Frequently JOHNNY RAW.

~Reach me downs~, or HAND ME DOWNS, clothes bought at secondhand shops.
From “REACH ME DOWN that, and let’s see if it fits.” In Houndsditch and
other celebrated old clothes’ marts, the goods are kept hanging on pegs
so as to be well within view of intending buyers.

~Reader~, a pocket-book; “Touch him for his READER,” _i.e._, rob him of
his pocket-book.

~Ready~, or READY GILT (maybe GELT), money. Used by Arbuthnot—“Lord
Strut was not very flush in READY.”

~Ready-reckoners~, the Highland regiments of the British army.

~Real jam~, a sporting phrase, meaning anything exceptionally good. It
is said to be REAL JAM for those who back a horse at a long price, when
the animal wins, or comes to a short figure.

~Recent incision~, the busy thoroughfare on the Surrey side of the
Thames, known to sober people as the New Cut. Even this latter name has
now been changed—if indeed the place ever was so called properly.
Although to the general public the street which runs from opposite
Rowland Hill’s Chapel to Westminster Bridge Road is known as the New
Cut, its name to the Board of Works is Lower Marsh.

~Redge~, gold.

~Red herring~, a soldier. The terms are exchangeable, the fish being
often called a “soldier.”

~Red lane~, the throat.

~Red liner~, an officer of the Mendicity Society.

~Red rag~, the tongue.

~Red un~, a gold watch.

~Redtape~, official routine. A term which was much in vogue during the
Crimean campaign, so famous for War Office blunderings.

~Regulars~, a thief’s fair share of plunder.

~Reliever~, a coat worn in turn by any party of poor devils whose
wardrobes are in pawn.

~Relieving Officer~, a significant term for a father.—_University._

~Renage~, to revoke, a word used in Ireland at the game of five-card.

~Rench~, vulgar pronunciation of RINSE. “(W)RENCH your mouth out,” said
a fashionable dentist one day.

~Re-raw~, “on the RE-RAW,” tipsy or drunk.

~Resurrection pie~, once a school but now a common phrase, used in
reference to a pie supposed to be made of the scraps and leavings that
have appeared before.

~Ret~, an abbreviation of the word REITERATION, used to denote the forme
which, in a printing-office, backs or perfects paper already printed on
one side.

~Rhino~, ready money.—_Old._

            “Some as I know,
    Have parted with their ready RINO.”

        _The Seaman’s Adieu_, Old Ballad, 1670.

~Rhinoceral~, rich, wealthy, abounding in RHINO. At first sound it would
seem as though it meant a man abounding in rhinoceroses.

~Rib~, a wife. Derivation, of course, Biblical.

~Ribbon~, gin, or other spirits. Modification of white satin.

~Ribbons~, the reins. “To handle the RIBBONS,” to drive.

~Ribroast~, to beat till the ribs are sore.—_Old_; but still in use:—

    “And he departs, not meanly boasting
    Of his magnificent RIBROASTING.”—_Hudibras._

~Rich~, spicy; also used in the sense of “too much of a good thing;” “a
RICH idea,” one too absurd or unreasonable to be adopted.

~Richard~, a dictionary. _See_ DICK.

~Ride~, “to RIDE the high horse,” or “RIDE roughshod over one,” to be
overbearing or oppressive; “to RIDE the black donkey,” to be in an ill
humour.

~Rider~, in a University examination, a problem or question appended to
another, as directly arising from or dependent on it;—beginning to be
generally used for any corollary or position which naturally arises from
any previous statement or evidence.

~Rider~, a supplementary clause in a document.

~Riff-raff~, low, vulgar rabble.

~Rig~, or trick, “spree,” or performance; “run a RIG,” to play a
trick.—_See_ JOHN GILPIN. “RIG the market,” in reality to play tricks
with it,—a mercantile slang phrase often used in the newspapers.

~Rigged~, “well RIGGED,” well dressed.—_Old Slang_, in use in 1736.
_See Bailey’s Dictionary.—Sea._

~Rigging~, a process well known in connexion with sales by auction, by
which articles are secured at prices considerably below their real
value. _See_ KNOCK-OUTS. To RIG the market is to do similar business on
a larger scale for the purpose of affecting the supplies, and thereby
increasing the profits on an original purchase of the goods thus made
scarce.

~Right as ninepence~, or NICE AS NINEPENCE (possible corruption of
NINE-PINS), quite right, exactly right, comfortable. _See_ NINEPENCE.

~Right you are~, a phrase implying entire acquiescence in what has been
said or done. The expression is singularly frequent and general amongst
the lower and middle classes of the metropolis.

~Rights~, “to have one to RIGHTS,” to be even with him, to serve him out
properly. “TO RIGHTS” is also an ejaculation signifying satisfaction of
the highest order.

~Rigmarole~, a prolix story.

~Rile~, to offend, to render very cross, irritated, or vexed. Properly,
to render liquor turbid.

~Ring~, to change; “RINGING castors,” changing hats; “to RING the
changes,” in low life means to change bad money for good; in
respectable society the phrase is sometimes employed to denote that the
aggressor has been paid back in his own coin, as in practical joking,
when the laugh is turned against the jester. The expression originally
came from the belfry.

~Ring~, a generic term given to horse-racing and pugilism,—the latter
was sometimes termed the PRIZE-RING. From the rings used for betting and
fighting in, respectively.

~Ring~, formerly “to go through the RING,” to take advantage of the
Insolvency Act, or be “whitewashed.” Now obsolete.

~Ring~, the open space in front of a racecourse stand, which is used for
betting purposes. Betting men are nowadays known as members of the ring,
especially if they are in the habit of attending race-meetings. RING, in
America, is a combination of speculators whose object is to force the
market for their own especial benefit without any regard to order or
decency. We have similar arrangements here, but hitherto no one word has
fairly described them.

~Ringdropping~, is a pursuit to which London “magsmen” and
“street-muggers” are prone. A ring or other spurious article is supposed
to be found just in front of a “soft-looking party,” and he or she is
tempted to buy it at less than half its supposed value.

~Rip~, a rake, “an old RIP,” an old libertine, or a debauchee.
Corruption of REPROBATE.

~Rip~, to go at a rare pace. This is an American term, and often means
to burst up. “Let her RIP, I’m insured.”

~Ripper~, a first-rate man or article.—_Provincial._

~Ripping~, excellent, very good. Equivalent to “stunning.”

~Rise~, “to take a RISE out of a person.” A metaphor from fly-fishing,
the silly fish RISING to be caught by an artificial fly; to mortify,
outwit, or cheat him, by superior cunning.

    “There is only one thing, unfortunately, of which Oxford men are
    economical, and that is, their University experience. They not only
    think it fair that Freshmen should go through their ordeal unaided,
    but many have a sweet satisfaction in their distresses, and even
    busy themselves in obtaining elevations, or, as it is vulgarly
    termed, in ‘getting RISES out of them.’”—_Hints to Freshmen_,
    Oxford, 1843.

~Rise, or raise, a Barney~, to collect a mob; term used by patterers and
“schwassle-box” (Punch and Judy) men.

~Roarer~, a broken-winded horse; or, in the more polite speech of the
stable, “a high blower.” ROARING, as applied to horses, is often termed
“talking” by turf-men. It is often said delicately by sporting writers,
when speaking of a broken-winded racehorse, that “he makes a noise.”

~Roaring trade~, a very successful business.—_Shopkeepers’ Slang._

~Roast~, to expose a person to a running fire of jokes for the
amusement and with the assistance of a whole company. A performance not
indulged in by gentlemen. QUIZZING is done by a single person only.

~Robin redbreast~, the ancient Bow Street runner. So called from the
colour of his waistcoat.

~Rock-a-low~, an overcoat. Corruption of the _French_, ROQUELAURE.

~Rocked~, “he’s only HALF-ROCKED,” _i.e._, half-witted. _See_
HALF-ROCKED.

~Rogue’s yarn~, a thread of red or blue worsted, worked into the ropes
manufactured in the Government dockyards, to identify them if stolen.
Also a blue thread worked into canvas, for the same purpose.

~Roll of snow~, a piece of linen, or bundle of underclothing.

~Romany~, a gipsy, or the gipsy language; the speech of the Roma or
Zincali.—_Spanish Gipsy._ “Can you patter ROMANY?” _i.e._, can you talk
“black,” or gipsy lingo?

~Rook~, a cheat, or tricky gambler; the opposite of “pigeon.”

~Rook~, to cheat, to play “rook” to another’s “pigeon.”

~Rook~, a clergyman, not only from his black attire, but also, perhaps,
from the old nursery favourite, the _History of Cock Robin_.

    “I, says the ROOK,
    With my little book,
    I’ll be the parson.”

~Rookery~, a low neighbourhood inhabited by dirty Irish and thieves—as
St. Giles’s ROOKERY.—_Old._ In military slang that part of the barracks
occupied by subalterns, often by no means a pattern of good order.

~Rooky~, rascally, rakish, scampish.

~Roost~, synonymous with PERCH, which _see_.

~Rooster~, a cock, whether bantam, game, barndoor, or of any other kind.
This is an Americanism which obtains full currency on the other side of
the Atlantic, though its use would infer that hens do not roost. As the
outcome of transpontine delicacy it must, however, be respected.

~Rooter~, anything good, or of a prime quality; “that is a ROOTER,”
_i.e._, a first-rate one of the sort.

~Rope~, to lose a race of any kind purposely, to swindle one’s backers
or the public by means of a “cross” or pre-arranged race, in which the
best man or best horse is made to ROPE, or run behind.

~Roper~, MISTRESS, “to marry MRS. ROPER” is to enlist in the Royal
Marines.

~Ropes~, the ways of London lower life. “To know the ROPES,” is to be
conversant with the minutiæ of metropolitan dodges, as regards both the
streets and the sporting world.

~Roping~, the act of pulling or restraining a horse, by its rider, to
prevent its winning a race—a trick not unfrequently practised on the
turf. Also when a pedestrian or other athlete loses where he should have
won, according to his backer’s calculations, he is accused of ROPING.

~Rose~, “under the rose” (frequently used in its _Latin_ form, _sub
rosâ_), _i.e._, under the obligation of silence and secrecy, of which
the rose was anciently an emblem, perhaps, as Sir Thomas Browne remarks,
from the closeness with which its petals are enfolded in the bud. The
Rose of Venus was given, says the classic legend, to Harpocrates, the
God of Silence, by Cupid, as a bribe to keep silent about the goddess’s
amours. It was commonly sculptured on the ceilings of banqueting rooms,
as a sign that what was said in free conversation there was not
afterwards to be divulged; and about 1526 was placed over the Roman
confessionals as an emblem of secrecy. The White Rose was also an emblem
of the Pretender, whose health, as king, his secret adherents used to
drink “under the ROSE.”

~Rosin~, beer or other drink given to musicians at a dancing party.

~Rosin-the-bow~, a fiddler. From a famous old song of that name.

~Rot~, nonsense, anything bad, disagreeable, or useless.

~Rot-gut~, bad, small beer. _See_ BUMCLINK. In America, cheap whisky.

~Rough~, bad; “ROUGH fish,” bad or stinking fish.—_Billingsgate._

~Rough-it~, to put up with chance entertainment, to take pot-luck and
what accommodation “turns up,” without sighing for better.

~Roughs~, coarse, or vulgar men. By many thought to be RUFF, corruption
of RUFFIAN.

~Rouleau~, a packet of sovereigns.—_Gaming._

~Round~, to tell tales, to SPLIT, which _see_; “to ROUND on a man,” to
swear to him as being the person, &c. Synonymous with BUFF, which _see_.
Also to turn round upon and abuse or rate. Shakspeare has ROUNDING,
whispering.

~Round~, “ROUND dealing,” honest trading; “ROUND sum,” a large sum.
Synonymous also, in a slang sense, with SQUARE, which _see_.

~Round~ (in the language of the street), the beat or usual walk of a
costermonger to sell his stock. A term used by street folk generally.

    “Watchmen, sometimes they made their sallies,
    And walk’d their ROUNDS through streets and allies.”

        _Ned Ward’s Vulgus Britannicus_, 1710.

The word “beat” has, so far as our modern guardians are concerned,
deposed “round.”

~Round robin~, a petition, or paper of remonstrance, with the signatures
written in a circle,—to prevent the first signer, or ringleader, from
being discovered.

~Round un~, an unblushingly given and well-proportioned lie. Sometimes
known as a “whacker.”

~Roundabout~, a large swing with four compartments, each the size, and
very much the shape, of the body of a cart, capable of seating six or
eight boys and girls, erected in a high frame, and turned round by men
at a windlass. Fairs and merry-makings generally abound with these
swings. The frames take to pieces, and are carried in vans from fair to
fair by miserable horses.

~Roundem~, a button.

~Row~, “the ROW,” _i.e._, Paternoster Row. The notorious Holywell Street
is now called by its denizens “Bookseller’s Row.”

~Row~, a noisy disturbance, tumult, or trouble. Originally Cambridge,
now universal. Seventy years ago it was written ROUE, which would almost
indicate a French origin, from _roué_, a profligate or disturber of the
peace.—_Vide_ George Parker’s _Life’s Painter_, 1789, p. 122. This is,
however, very unlikely, as the derivation of the French word shows.

~Rowdy~, money. In America, a ruffian, a brawler, a “rough.” Rowdyism is
the state of being of New York roughs and loafers.

~Rowdy-dow~, low, vulgar “not the CHEESE,” or thing.

~Rub~, a quarrel or impediment; “there’s the RUB,” _i.e._, that is the
difficulty.—_Shakspeare and L’Estrange._

~Rubbed out~, dead,—a melancholy expression, of late frequently used in
fashionable novels. RUBBED OUT is synonymous with WIPED OUT, which
_see_.

~Rubber~, a term at whist, &c., the best of three games.

~Ruck~, the undistinguished crowd; “to come in with the RUCK,” to arrive
at the winning-post among the thick of the unplaced horses.—_Racing
term._

~Ruction~, an Irish row. A faction fight.

~Ruggy~, fusty, frowsy.

~Rule.~ “To run the RULE over,” is, among thieves, to try all a person’s
pockets quietly, as done by themselves, or to search any one thoroughly,
as at the police-station.

~Rule the roast~, to be at the head of affairs, to be “cock of the
walk.”

~Rum~, like its opposite, QUEER, was formerly a much-used prefix,
signifying fine, good, gallant, or valuable; perhaps in some
way connected with ROME. Nowadays it means indifferent, bad, or
questionable, and we often hear even persons in polite society use such
a phrase as, “What a RUM fellow he is, to be sure,” in speaking of a man
of singular habits or appearance. The term, from its frequent use, long
since claimed a place in our dictionaries; but, with the exception of
Johnson, who says RUM, a cant word for a clergyman(!), no lexicographer
has deigned to notice it.

    “Thus RUMLY floor’d, the kind Acestes ran,
    And pitying, raised from earth the game old man.”

        _Virgil’s Æneid_, book v., Translation _by Thomas Moore_.

~Rum cull~, the manager of a theatre, generally the master of a
travelling troop.

~Rumbler~, a four-wheeled cab. Not so common as BOUNDER. _See_ GROWLER.

~Rumbowling~, anything inferior or adulterated.—_Sea._

~Rumbumptious~, haughty, pugilistic.

~Rumbustious~, or RUMBUSTICAL, pompous, haughty, boisterous, careless of
the comfort of others.

~Rumgumption~, or GUMPTION, knowledge, capacity, capability,—hence,
RUMGUMPTIOUS, knowing, wide-awake, forward, positive, pert, blunt.

~Rum-mizzler~, Seven Dials cant for a person who is clever at making his
escape, or getting out of a difficulty.

~Rump~, to turn the back upon any one. A still more decided “cut direct”
than the “cold shoulder.”

~Rumpus~, a noise, disturbance, a “row.”

~Rum-slim~, or RUM SLING, rum punch.

~Rumy~, a good woman or girl.—_Gipsy Cant._ In the Continental _Gipsy_,
ROMI, a woman, a wife, is the feminine of RO, a man.

~Run~ (good or bad), the success or duration of a piece’s
performance.—_Theatrical._

~Run~, to comprehend, &c.; “I don’t RUN to it,” _i.e._, I can’t do it, I
don’t understand; also not money enough, as, “I should like to, but it
wont RUN to it.”

~Run~, “to get the RUN upon any person,” to have the upper hand, or be
able to laugh at him. RUN down, to abuse or backbite any one; to “lord
it,” or “drive over” him. Originally stable slang.

~Run for the money~, TO HAVE A, to have a start given in with a bet. As
20 to 1 against Doncaster, with a RUN given. _See_ P.P. To have a RUN
FOR ONE’S MONEY is also to have a good determined struggle for anything.

~Run-in~, to lock up in the station-house. The police are very fond of
threatening to RUN-IN any person to whom they may take exception, and,
as recent revelations have shown, are by no means averse from putting
their threats into execution.

~Running patterer~, a street seller who runs or moves briskly along,
calling aloud his wares.

~Running stationer~, a hawker of books, ballads, dying speeches, and
newspapers. Persons of this class formerly used to run with newspapers,
blowing a horn, when they were sometimes termed FLYING STATIONERS.
Nowadays, in the event of any political or social disturbance, the
miserable relics of these peripatetic newsmen bawl the heads of the
telegram or information in quiet London thoroughfares, to the
disturbance of the residents. The race is very nearly extinct, the
evening-paper boys having run them to earth.

~Rush~, to come upon suddenly, generally for the purpose of borrowing.
To “give a man the RUSH,” is to spunge upon him all day, and then borrow
money at the finish, or pursue some such similar mode of procedure.

~Rush~, “doing it on the RUSH,” running away, or making off.

~Rust~, “to nab the RUST,” to take offence. RUSTY, cross, ill-tempered,
morose; not able to go through life like a person of easy and “polished”
manners.

~Rustication~, the sending of an offender from the University for one
term or more, thus hindering his qualifying for a degree.

~Rusty guts~, a blunt, rough, old fellow. Corruption of RUSTICUS.

~Rye.~ Gipsy term for a young man. In the same parlance “rawnie” is a
young woman.

~Sack~, to “get the SACK,” to be discharged by an employer. Varied in
the North of England to “get the BAG.” In London it is sometimes spoken
of as “getting the EMPTY.” It is common now to speak of “getting the
BULLET,” an evident play on the word discharge.

~Sad dog~, a merry fellow, a joker, a “gay” or “fast” man.

~Saddle~, an additional charge made by the manager to a performer upon
his benefit night.—_Theatrical._

~Safe~, trusty, worthy of confidence. A SAFE card is a man who knows
“what’s o’clock.” A SAFE man among betters is one who is sure to fulfil
his engagements.

~Safe un~, a horse which will not run, or will not try, in a race. The
bookmakers in London have the information sent them by the touts in
their pay, and lay against the SAFE UN, who is also called a “stiff un,”
a “dead un,” or a “shtumer,” as often as they can, irrespective of the
state of their books. Sometimes a SAFE UN will win, owing to the owner
or trainer having, for various reasons, altered his mind. Such a result
then goes to prove the “glorious uncertainty of the turf,” a phrase in
very common use among sporting writers whenever a favourite is beaten,
or whenever a horse runs slow one day and loses, and very fast the next
day and wins.

~Sails~, nickname for the sail-maker on board ship.

~St. Martin’s lace~, imitation gold lace; stage tinsel.

~Saint Monday~, a holiday most religiously observed by journeymen
shoemakers and other mechanics. An Irishman observed that this saint’s
anniversary happened every week. In some parts of the country Monday is
termed Cobblers’ Sunday.

~Sal~, a salary.—_Theatrical._

~Salaam~, a compliment or salutation.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Salamander~, a street acrobat and juggler who eats fire.

~Saloop~, SALEP, or SALOP, a greasy-looking beverage, formerly sold on
stalls at early morning, prepared from a powder made of the root of the
_Orchis mascula_, or Red-handed Orchis. Coffee-stands have superseded
SALOOP stalls; but, in addition to other writers, Charles Lamb, in one
of his papers, has left some account of this drinkable, which he says
was of all preparations the most grateful to the stomachs of young
chimney-sweeps. The present generation has no knowledge of this drink,
except that derived from books. The word “slops”—as applied to weak,
warm drink—is very likely derived from the Cockney pronunciation of
SALOOP.

~Salt~, a sailor.

~Salt~, “it’s rather too SALT,” said of an extravagant hotel bill. Also,
a sort of black mail or tribute levied on visitors or travellers by the
Eton boys, at their triennial festival called the “Montem,” by ancient
custom and privileges. It is now abolished. A periodical published at
Eton many years ago for circulation amongst the boys was called “_The
SALT-box_.” When a person about to sell a business connexion makes
fictitious entries in the books of accounts, to simulate that a much
more profitable trade is carried on than there really is, he is said to
SALT the books—SALTING and COOKING being somewhat similar operations.
At the gold diggings of Australia, miners sometimes SALT an unproductive
hole by sprinkling a few grains of gold-dust over it, and thus obtain a
good price from a “green hand.” Unpromising speculations are frequently
thus SALTED to entrap the unwary, the wildest ideas being rendered
palatable _cum grano salis_. And though old birds are not readily caught
by chaff, the efficacy of SALT in bird-catching, so far as the young are
concerned, is proverbial.

~Salt-box~, the condemned cell in Newgate.

~Salt junk~, navy salt beef. _See_ OLD HORSE.

~Saltee~, a penny. Pence, &c., are thus reckoned:—

 ONEY SALTEE, a penny, from the _Italian_,             UNO SOLDO.
 DOOE SALTEE, twopence                                 DUE SOLDI.
 TRAY SALTEE, threepence                               TRE SOLDI.
 QUARTERER SALTEE, fourpence                           QUATTRO SOLDI.
 CHINKER SALTEE, fivepence                             CINQUE SOLDI.
 SAY SALTEE, sixpence                                  SEI SOLDI.
 SAY ONEY SALTEE, or SETTER SALTEE, sevenpence         SETTE SOLDI.
 SAY DOOE SALTEE, or OTTER SALTEE, eightpence          OTTO SOLDI.
 SAY TRAY SALTEE, or NOBBA SALTEE, ninepence           NOVE SOLDI.
 SAY QUARTERER SALTEE, or DACHA SALTEE, tenpence       DIECI SOLDI.
 SAY CHINKER SALTEE, or DACHA ONEY SALTEE, elevenpence DIECI UNO SOLDI, &c.
 ONEY BEONG, one shilling.
 A BEONG SAY SALTEE, one shilling and sixpence.
 DOOE BEONG SAY SALTEE, or MADZA CAROON, half-a-crown, or two
 shillings and sixpence.

⁂ This curious list of numerals in use among the London street folk is,
strange as it may seem, derived from the _Lingua Franca_, or bastard
_Italian_, of the Mediterranean seaports, of which other examples may be
found in the pages of this Dictionary. SALTEE, the cant term used by the
costermongers and others for a penny, is no other than the _Italian_,
SOLDO (plural, SOLDI), and the numerals—as may be seen by the _Italian_
equivalents—are a tolerably close imitation of the originals. After the
number six, a curious variation occurs, which is peculiar to the London
cant, seven being reckoned as SAY ONEY, _six-one_, SAY DOOE, _six-two_
= 8, and so on. DACHA is perhaps from the _Greek_ δέκα, ten, which, in
the Constantinopolitan _Lingua Franca_, is likely enough to have been
substituted for the _Italian_. MADZA is clearly the _Italian_ MEZZA. The
origin of BEONG has not yet been discovered, unless it be the _French_
BIEN, the application of which to a shilling is not so evident; but
amongst costermongers and other street folk it is quite immaterial what
foreign tongue contributes to their secret language. Providing the terms
are unknown to the police and the public generally, they care not a rush
whether the polite French, the gay Spaniards, or the cloudy Germans help
to swell their vocabulary. The numbers of low foreigners, however,
dragging out a miserable existence in our crowded neighbourhoods, organ
grinders and image sellers, foreign seamen from the vessels in the
river, and our own connexion with Malta and the Ionian Isles, may
explain, to a certain extent, the phenomenon of these Southern phrases
in the mouths of costers and tramps. Professor Ascoli, in his _Studj
Critici_, absurdly enough derives these words from the ancient
commercial importance of Italian settlers in England, when they gave a
name to Lombard Street!

~Salve~, praise, flattery, chaff.

~Sam~, _i.e._, DICKY-SAM, a native of Liverpool.

~Sam~, to “stand SAM,” to pay for refreshment or drink, to stand
paymaster for anything. An Americanism, originating in the letters U.S.
on the knapsacks of the United States’ soldiers, which letters were
jocularly said to be the initials of Uncle Sam (the Government), who
pays for all. In use in this country as early as 1827.

~Sammy~, a stupid fellow.

~Sampan~, a small boat.—_Anglo-Chinese._

~Samshoo~, a fiery, noxious spirit, distilled from rice. Spirits
generally.—_Anglo-Chinese._

~Samson and Abel~, a group of wrestlers in the centre of Brasenose
quadrangle. Some said it represented Samson killing a Philistine; others
Cain killing Abel. So the matter was compromised as above.—_Oxford
University._

~Sandwich~, a human advertising medium, placed between two boards
strapped, one on his breast the other on his shoulders. A “toad in the
hole” is the term applied to the same individual when his person is
confined by a four-sided box. A gentleman with a lady on each arm is
sometimes called a SANDWICH. The French phrase for this kind of
SANDWICH, _l’âne à deux pannières_, is expressive.

~Sanguinary James~, a raw sheep’s-head. _See_ BLOODY JEMMY.

~Sank work~, tailors’ phrase for soldiers’ clothes. Perhaps from the
_Norman_ SANC, blood,—in allusion either to the soldier’s calling, or
the colour of his coat.

~Sap~, or SAPSCULL, a poor green simpleton, with no heart for work.

~Sappy~, soft, foolish, namby-pamby, milk-and-watery. “It’s such a SAPPY
book.”

~Satin~, gin; “a yard of SATIN,” a glass of gin. Term used by females on
make-believe errands, when the real object of their departure from home
is to replenish the private bottle. With servants the words “tape” and
“ribbon” are more common, the purchase of these feminine requirements
being the general excuse for asking to “run out for a little while.”
_See_ WHITE SATIN.

~Saucebox~, a pert young person. In low life it also signifies the
mouth.

~Save~, to give part of one bet for part of another. A. and B. have
backed different horses, and they agree that in the event of either one
winning he shall give the other, say, £5. This is called “SAVING a
fiver,” and generally is done when scratchings and knockings-out have
left the field so that one of the two speculators must be a winner. The
practice also obtains much in competitions decided in heats or rounds,
in the course of which backers and layers comparing their prospects
often “SAVE a bit” with each other. Saving is, therefore, a form of
hedging.

~Saveloy~, a sausage of bread and chopped beef smoked, a minor kind of
POLONY, which _see_.

~Savvey~, to know; “do you SAVVEY that?” _Spanish_, SABE. In the nigger
and _Anglo-Chinese patois_, this is SABBY, “me no SABBY.” It is a
general word among the lower classes all over the world. It also means
acuteness or cleverness; as, “That fellow has plenty of SAVVEY.”

~Saw~, a term at whist. A SAW is established when two partners
alternately trump a suit, played to each other for the express purpose.

~Saw your timber~, “be off!” equivalent to “cut your stick.”
Occasionally varied, with mock refinement, to “amputate your mahogany.”
_See_ CUT.

~Sawbones~, a surgeon.

~Sawney~, or SANDY, a Scotchman. Corruption of Alexander.

~Sawney~, a simpleton; a gaping, awkward lout.

~Sawney~, bacon. SAWNEY HUNTER, one who steals bacon.

~Scab~, a worthless person.—_Old._ Shakspeare uses “scald” in a similar
sense.

~Scab-raiser~, a drummer in the army, so called from one of the duties
formerly pertaining to that office, viz., inflicting corporal punishment
on the soldiers.—_Military._

~Scabby neck~, a native of Denmark.—_Sea._

~Scabby-sheep~, epithet applied by the vulgar to a person who has been
in questionable society, or under unholy influence, and become tainted.
Also a mean disreputable fellow.

~Scaldrum dodge~, a dodge in use among begging impostors of burning the
body with a mixture of acids and gunpowder, so as to suit the hues and
complexions of any accident to be deplored by a confiding public.

~Scaly~, shabby, or mean. Perhaps anything which betokens the presence
of the “Old Serpent,” or it may be a variation of “fishy.”

~Scamander~, to wander about without a settled purpose;—possibly in
allusion to the winding course of the Homeric river of that name.

~Scammered~, drunk.

~Scamp~, a graceless fellow, a rascal; a wandering vagabond; scamping
was formerly the cant term for plundering and thieving. A ROYAL-SCAMP
was a highwayman, whilst a FOOT-SCAMP was an ordinary thief with nothing
but his legs to trust to in case of an attempt at capture. Some have
derived SCAMP from _qui ex campo exit_, one who leaves the field, a
deserter.

~Scamp~, to give short measure or quantity; applied to dishonest
contractors. Also to hurry through a task in a way which precludes the
possibility of its being done well. Probably the same as SKIMP and
SCRIMP.

~Scandal-water~, tea; from old maids’ tea-parties being generally a
focus for scandal.

~Scaramouch~, properly a tumbler, or SALTIMBANCO. Also a disreputable
fellow.

~Scarborough-warning~, a warning given too late to be taken advantage
of. When a person is driven over, and then told to keep out of the way,
he receives SCARBOROUGH-WARNING. Fuller says the proverb alludes to an
event which happened at that place in 1557, when Thomas Stafford seized
upon Scarborough Castle before the townsmen had the least notice of his
approach.

~Scarce~, TO MAKE ONESELF; to be off; to decamp.

~Scarlet fever~, the desire felt by young ladies to flirt with officers
in preference to civilians.

~Scarlet-town~, Reading, in Berkshire. As the name of this place is
pronounced Redding, SCARLET-TOWN is probably a rude pun upon it.

~Scarper~, to run away; _Spanish_, ESCAPAR, to escape, make off;
_Italian_, SCAPPARE. “SCARPER with the feeley of the donna of the
carzey,” to run away with the daughter of the landlady of the house;
almost pure _Italian_, “SCAPPARE COLLA FIGLIA DELLA DONNA DELLA
CASA.”—_Seven Dials and Prison Cant_, from the _Lingua Franca_.

~Schism-shop~, a Dissenters’ meeting-house.—_University._

~Schofel~, bad money. _See_ SHOFUL.

~School~, a knot of men or boys; generally a body of idlers or street
gamblers. Also, two or more “patterers” working together in the streets.

~Schroff~, a banker, treasurer, or confidential clerk.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Schwassle box~, the street arrangement for Punch and Judy. _See_
SWATCHEL-COVE.

~Sconce~, the head; judgment, sense.—_Dutch._

~Sconce~, to fine. Used by Dons as well as undergrads. The Dons fined or
SCONCED for small offences; _e.g._, five shillings for wearing a
coloured coat in hall at dinner-time. Among undergrads a pun, or an
oath, or an indecent remark, was SCONCED by the head of the table. If
the offender could, however, floor the tankard of beer which he was
SCONCED, he could retort on his SCONCER to the extent of twice the
amount he was SCONCED in.—_Oxford University._

~Score~, a reckoning, “to run up a SCORE at a public-house,” to obtain
credit there until pay-day, or a fixed time, when the debt must be
“wiped off.” From the old practice of scoring a tippler’s indebtedness
on the inside of a public-house door.

~Scorf~, to eat voraciously.

~Scot~, a quantity of anything, a lot, a share.—_Anglo-Saxon_, SCEAT,
pronounced SHOT.

~Scot~, temper, or passion,—from the irascible temperament of the
Scotch; “Oh! what a SCOT he was in,” _i.e._, what temper he showed.

~Scotch coffee~, biscuits toasted and boiled in water. A gross calumny
on the much-enduring Scotians; a supposed joke on their
parsimony.—_Sea._

~Scotch fiddle~, the itch; “to play the SCOTCH FIDDLE,” to work the
index finger of the right hand like a fiddlestick between the index and
middle finger of the left. This provokes a Scotchman in the highest
degree, as it implies that he is afflicted with the itch. It is supposed
that a continuous oatmeal diet is productive of cutaneous affection.

~Scotch greys~, lice. Our northern neighbours were calumniously
reported, in the “good old times” of ignorance and prejudice, to be
peculiarly liable to cutaneous eruptions and parasites.

~Scotches~, the legs; also synonymous with notches.

~Scout~, a college valet, or waiter.—_Oxford._ _See_ GYP.

~Scout~, the male servant, who generally has a staircase under his
charge, and waits on the men in each set of rooms. The female servant
(not unfrequently his wife or daughter) is the bedmaker.—_University._

~Scrag~, the neck.—_Old Cant._ _Scotch_, CRAIG. Still used by butchers.
Hence, SCRAG, to hang by the neck, and SCRAGGING, an execution,—also
_Old Cant_.

~Scran~, pieces of meat, broken victuals. Formerly the reckoning at a
public-house. SCRANNING, or “out on the SCRAN,” begging for broken
victuals. Also, an Irish malediction of a mild sort, “Bad SCRAN to yer!”
_i.e._, bad food to you.

~Scran-bag~, a soldier’s haversack.—_Military Slang._

~Scrap~, to fight. Also used as a substantive. Prize-fighters are often
known as SCRAPPERS.

~Scrape~, a difficulty; SCRAPE, low wit for a shave.

~Scrape~, cheap butter; also butter laid on bread in the thinnest
possible manner, as though it had been laid on and scraped off again.
“Bread and SCRAPE,” the bread and butter issued to schoolboys,—so
called from the manner in which the butter is laid on.

~Scratch~, an imaginary meeting-point in a fight, or verbal contest;
“coming up to the SCRATCH,” preparing to fight—literally approaching
the line which used to be chalked on the ground to divide the ring.
According to the rules of the prize ring, the toe should be placed at
the SCRATCH, so the phrase often is “toeing the SCRATCH.”

~Scratch~, “no great SCRATCH,” of little worth.

~Scratch~, to strike a horse’s name out of the list of runners in a
particular race. “Tomboy was SCRATCHED for the Derby at 10 a.m. on
Wednesday, from which period all bets made in reference to him are
void.” _See_ P.P.—_Turf._ One of Boz’s characters asks whether horses
are “really made more lively by being SCRATCHED.”

~Scratch-race~ (on the turf), a race at which the horses run at catch
weights, a race without restrictions. In boating, a race in which the
crew are picked up anyhow. A SCRATCH crew is a crew of all sorts.

~Screaming~, first-rate, splendid. Believed to have been first used in
the Adelphi play-bills; “a SCREAMING farce,” one calculated to make the
audience scream with laughter. Now a general expression.

~Screed~, an illogical or badly-written article or paper upon any
subject.

~Screeve~, a letter, a begging petition.

~Screeve~, to write, or devise; “to SCREEVE a fakement,” to concoct, or
write, a begging letter, or other impostor’s document. From the
_Dutch_, SCHRYVEN; _German_, SCHREIBEN, to write.

~Screever~, a man who draws with coloured chalks on the pavement figures
of our Saviour crowned with thorns, specimens of elaborate writing,
thunderstorms, ships on fire, &c. The men who attend these pavement
chalkings, and receive halfpence and sixpences from the admirers of
street art, are not always the draughtsmen. The artist or SCREEVER
draws, perhaps, in half-a-dozen places in the course of a morning, and
rents the spots out to as many cadaverous-looking men, who, when any one
looks hard at them, will commence to dabble clumsily with the short
pieces of chalks they always keep at hand. There are impostors of this
kind in higher walks of art.

~Screw~, an unsound or broken-down horse, that requires both whip and
spur to get him along. So called from the screw-like manner in which his
ribs generally show through the skin.

~Screw~, a mean or stingy person.

~Screw~, salary, or wages.

~Screw~, “to put on the SCREW,” to limit one’s credit, to be more exact
and precise; “to put under the SCREW;” to compel, to coerce, to
influence by strong pressure.

~Screw~, a small packet of tobacco. A “twist” of the “weed.”

~Screw~, a key—skeleton, or otherwise.

~Screw~, a turnkey.

~Screw loose.~ When friends become cold and distant towards each other,
it is said there is a SCREW LOOSE betwixt them; the same phrase is also
used when anything goes wrong with a person’s credit or reputation.

~Screwed~, intoxicated or drunk.

~Scrimmage~, or SCRUMMAGE, a disturbance or row.—_Ancient._ Probably a
corruption of SKIRMISH.

~Scrimshaw.~ Anything made by sailors for themselves in their leisure
hours at sea is termed SCRIMSHAW-WORK.

~Scrouge~, to crowd or squeeze.—_Wiltshire._

~Scruff~, the back part of the neck seized by the adversary in an
encounter. “I seized him by the SCRUFF of the neck, and chucked him
out.” Originally SCURF.

~Scrumptious~, nice, particular, beautiful.

~Scufter~, a policeman.—_North Country._

~Scull~, or SKULL, the head, or master of a college.—_University_, but
nearly obsolete; the gallery, however, in St. Mary’s (the Oxford
University church), where the “Heads of Houses” sit in solemn state, is
still nicknamed the “Golgotha” by the undergraduates.

~Scurf~, a mean fellow. Literally a scurvy fellow.

~Sea-connie~, the steersman of an Indian ship. By the insurance laws he
must be either a PYAH Portuguese, a European, or a Manilla man,—Lascars
not being allowed to be helmsmen.

~Sea-cook~, “son of a SEA-COOK,” an opprobrious phrase used on board
ship, differing from “son of a gun,” which is generally used admiringly
or approvingly.

~Seals~, a religious slang term for converts. Also a Mormon term for
wives. _See_ OWNED.

~See.~ Like “go” and “do,” this useful verb has long been supplemented
with a slang or unauthorized meaning. In street parlance, “to SEE” is to
know or believe; “I don’t SEE that,” _i.e._, “I don’t put faith in what
you offer, or I know what you say to be untrue.”

~See it out~, to stay out late or early, and see the gas put out. Also
to complete an undertaking.

~See the king.~ _See_ ELEPHANT.

~Seedy~, worn-out, poverty-stricken, used-up, shabby. Metaphorical
expression from the appearance of flowers when off bloom and running to
SEED; hence said of one who wears clothes until they crack and become
shabby. “How seedy he looks,” said of any man whose clothes are worn
threadbare, with greasy facings, and hat brightened up by perspiration
and continual polishing and wetting. When a man’s coat begins to look
worn-out and shabby he is said to look SEEDY and ready for cutting. This
term has been in common use for nearly two centuries, and latterly has
found its way into most dictionaries. Formerly slang, it is now a
recognised word, and one of the most expressive in the English language.
The French are always amused with it, they having no similar term.

    “Oh, let my hat be e’er sae brown,
      My coat be e’er sae SEEDY, O!
    My whole turn-out scarce worth a crown,
      Like gents well-bred, but needy, O!”

        _Fisher’s Garland for 1835._

~Seeley’s pigs~, blocks of iron in Government dockyards. Mr. Seeley,
M.P., was the first to call attention in the House of Commons to the
scandalous waste of pig-iron in the dockyards. Some of the yards were
found to be half paved with blocks of metal, which were thence called
“SEELEY’S PIGS.”

~Sell~, a deception, or disappointment; also a lying joke.

~Sell~, to deceive, swindle, or play a practical joke upon a person. A
sham is a SELL in street parlance. “SOLD again, and got the money,” a
patterer cries after having successfully deceived somebody. Shakspeare
uses SELLING in a similar sense, viz., blinding or deceiving.

~Sensation~, a quartern of gin.

~Serene~, all right; “it’s all SERENE,” a street phrase of very modern
adoption, the burden of a song. SERENE, ALL SERENE! from the _Spanish_
SERENO, equivalent to the English “all’s well;” a countersign of
sentinels, supposed to have been acquired by some filibusters who were
imprisoned in Cuba, and liberated by the intercession of the British
ambassador. The Sereno, the Spanish night watchman, cries out, with the
hour, the state of the atmosphere. He was called the Sereno (clear),
from his announcing the usual fine (sereno) night—quite different from
the work of our old “Charlies,” whose usual call was one of foul
weather.

~Serve out~, to punish, or be revenged on any one.

~Setter~, sevenpence. _Italian_, SETTE. _See_ SALTEE.—_Lingua Franca._

~Setter~, a person employed by the vendor at an auction to run the
bidding up; to bid against _bona-fide_ bidders. Also the man who takes
the box at hazard, and “sets a go.”

~Setting jewels~, taking the best portions of a clever book not much
known to the general public, and incorporating them quietly with a new
work by a thoroughly original author. The credit of this term belongs to
Mr. Charles Reade, who explained that the process is accountable for the
presence of some writing by one Jonathan Swift, in a story published at
Christmas, 1872, and called _The Wandering Heir_.

~Settle~, to kill, ruin, or effectually quiet a person.

~Settled~, transported, or sent to penal servitude for life; sometimes
spoken of as WINDED-SETTLED.

~Set-to~, a sparring match, a fight; “a DEAD SET” is a determined
opposition in argument, or in movement.

~Sevendible~, a very curious word, used only in the North of Ireland, to
denote something particularly severe, strong, or sound. It is, no doubt,
derived from sevendouble—that is, sevenfold—and is applied to linen
cloth, a heavy beating, a harsh reprimand, &c.

~Seven-pennorth~, transportation for seven years.

~Seven-sided animal~, a one-eyed man, as he has an inside, outside, left
side, right side, foreside, backside, and blind side.

~Seven-up~, the game of all-fours, when played for seven chalks—that
is, when seven points or chalks have to be made to win the game.

~Sewed-up~, done up, used up, intoxicated. _Dutch_, SEEUWT, sick.

~Sewn-up~, quite worn-out, or “dead beat.”

~Shack~, a “chevalier d’industrie.” A scamp, a
blackguard.—_Nottingham._

~Shack-per-swaw~, every one for himself,—a phrase in use amongst the
lower orders at the East-end of London, derived apparently from the
_French_, CHACUN POUR SOI.

~Shackly~, loose, rickety.—_Devonshire._

~Shady~, an expression implying decadence. On “the SHADY side of forty”
implies that a person is considerably older than forty. SHADY also means
inferiority in other senses. A “shady trick” is either a shabby one,
mean or trumpery, or else it is one contemptible from the want of
ability displayed. The SHADY side of a question is, and fairly enough
too, that which has no brightness to recommend it.

~Shake~, a disreputable man or woman.—_North._ In London a SHAKE is a
prostitute.

~Shake-down~, an improvised bed.

~Shake-lurk~, a false paper carried by an impostor, giving an account of
a “dreadful shipwreck.”

~Shake the elbow~, TO, a roundabout expression for dice-playing. To
“crook the ELBOW” is an Americanism for “to drink.”

~Shaker~, a shirt.

~Shakers~, a Puritanical sect, almost peculiar to America, and not
similar to our Quakers, as is generally believed. They have very strange
notions on things in general, and especially on marriage and the
connexion of the sexes.

~Shakes~, a bad bargain is said to be “no great SHAKES;” “pretty fair
SHAKES” is anything good or favourable.—_Byron._ In America, a fair
SHAKE is a fair trade or a good bargain.

~Shakes~, “in a brace of SHAKES,” _i.e._, in an instant.

~Shakester~, or SHICKSTER, a female. Amongst costermongers this term is
invariably applied to ladies, or the wives of tradesmen, and females
generally, of the classes immediately above them. Amongst Jews the word
signifies a woman of shady antecedents. Supposed to be derived from the
_Hebrew_, SHIKTZA. It is generally pronounced “shickser.”

~Shaky~, said of a person of questionable health, integrity, or
solvency; at the Universities, of one not likely to pass his
examination.

~Shaler~, a girl. Corrupt form of _Gaelic_, CAILLE, a young woman.

~Shalley-gonahey~, a smock-frock.—_Cornish._

~Shallow~, the peculiar barrow used by costermongers.

~Shallow~, a weak-minded country justice of the peace.—_Shakspeare._

~Shallow-cove~, a begging rascal, who goes about the country half naked,
with the most limited amount of rags upon his person, wearing neither
shoes, stockings, nor hat.

~Shallow-mot~, a ragged woman,—the frequent companion of the
SHALLOW-COVE.

~Shallows~, “to go on the SHALLOWS,” to go half naked.

~Sham~, contraction of champagne. In general use among the lower class
of sporting men. Sometimes extended to SHAMMY.

~Sham Abraham~, to feign sickness. _See_ ABRAHAM.

~Shandrydan~, an old-fashioned or rickety conveyance of the “shay”
order.

~Shandy-gaff~, ale and gingerbeer. Origin unknown, but use very common.

~Shanks~, legs.

~Shanks’s mare~, “to ride SHANK’S MARE,” to go on foot.

~Shant~, a pot or quart; “SHANT of bivvy,” a quart of beer.

~Shanty~, a rude, temporary habitation. The word is principally employed
to designate the huts inhabited by navigators, when constructing large
lines of railway far distant from towns. It is derived from the _French_
CHANTIER, used by the Canadians for a log hut, and has travelled from
thence, by way of the United States, to England.

~Shanty~, a song. A term in use among sailors. From CHANTER.

~Shapes~, “to cut up” or “show SHAPES,” to exhibit pranks, or
flightiness.

~Shark~, a sharper, a swindler. Bow Street term in 1785, now in most
dictionaries.—_Friesic_ and _Danish_, SCHURK. _See_ LAND-SHARK.

~Sharp~, or SHARPER, a cunning cheat, a rogue,—the opposite of FLAT.

~Sharp~, a similar expression to “TWO PUN’ TEN” (which _see_), used by
assistants in shops to signify that a customer of suspected honesty is
amongst them. The shopman in this case would ask one of the assistants,
in a voice loud enough to be generally heard, “Has Mr. SHARP come in
yet?” “No,” would probably be the reply; “but he is expected every
minute.” The signal is at once understood, and a general look-out kept
upon the suspected party.

~Sharp’s-alley blood-worms~, beef sausages and black puddings. Sharp’s
Alley was, until City improvements caused it to be destroyed, a noted
slaughtering-place near Smithfield.

~Shave~, a false alarm, a hoax, a sell. This term was much in vogue in
the Crimea during the Russian campaign,—that is, though much used by
the military before then, the term did not, until that period, become
known to the general public.

~Shave~, a narrow escape. At Cambridge, “just SHAVING through,” or
“making a SHAVE,” is just escaping a “pluck” by coming out at the bottom
of the list.

    “My terms are anything but dear,
    Then read with me, and never fear;
    The examiners we’re sure to queer,
    And get through, if you make a SHAVE on’t.”

        _The Private Tutor._

~Shave;~ “to SHAVE a customer,” charge him more for an article than the
marked price. Used in the drapery trade. When the master sees an
opportunity of doing this, he strokes his chin, as a signal to his
assistant who is serving the customer.

~Shaver~, a sharp fellow; there are young and old SHAVERS.—_Sea._

~Shebeen~, an unlicensed place where spirituous liquors are illegally
sold. A word almost peculiar to Ireland.

~Shed a tear~, to take a dram, or glass of neat spirits; jocular phrase
used, with a sort of grim earnestness, by old topers to each other. “Now
then, old fellow, come and SHED A TEAR!” an invitation to take “summat
short.” The origin may have been that ardent spirits, taken neat by
younger persons, usually bring water to their eyes. With confirmed
drinkers, however, the phrase is used with an air of mingled humour and
regret at their own position. A still more pathetic phrase is—“putting
a NAIL IN ONE’S COFFIN,” which _see_. The term SHED A TEAR is probably
derived from “eye-water.”

~Sheen~, bad money.—_Scotch._

~Sheeny~, a Jew. This word is used by both Jew and Gentile at the
East-end of London, and is not considered objectionable on either side.

~Sheep’s eyes~, loving looks, “to make SHEEP’S EYES at a person,” to
cast amorous glances towards one on the sly.

    “But he, the beast, was casting SHEEP’S EYES at her
      Out of his bullock head.”

        _Colman, Broad Grins._

~Shelf~, “on the SHELF,” not yet disposed of; young ladies are said to
be so situated when they cannot meet with husbands. “On the SHELF” also
means pawned, or laid by in trust.

~Shell out~, to pay or count out money. Also a game played on a billiard
table, a variation of pool.

~Shepherd~, to look after carefully, to place under police surveillance.

~Shice~, nothing; “to do anything for SHICE,” to get no payment. The
term was first used by the Jews in the last century. Grose gives the
phrase CHICE-AM-A-TRICE, which has a synonymous meaning. _Spanish_,
CHICO, little; _Anglo-Saxon_, CHICHE, niggardly; or perhaps connected
with the _German_, SCHEISSEN.

~Shicer~, a mean man, a humbug, a “duffer,”—a worthless person, one who
will not work. This is the worst term one Jew can use to another. At the
diggings it means a hole which yields nothing.

~Shickery~, shabby, bad. From SHAKY, SHAKERY.

~Shickster~, a lady. _See_ SHAKESTER.

~Shickster-crabs~, ladies’ shoes.—_Tramps’ term._

~Shigs~, money, silver.—_East London._

~Shikaree~, a hunter, a sportsman.—_Anglo-Indian._ An English sportsman
who has seen many ups and downs in jungles of the East styles himself
“an OLD SHIKAREE.”—_Anglo-Indian._ Also spelt SHEKARRY.

~Shilly-shally~, to trifle or fritter away time; to be irresolute.
Corruption of “Shall I, shall I?”

~Shin~, an Americanism for walking. “I’m tired of SHINNING around.”

~Shindy~, a row, or noise. A SHINDY generally means a regular mêlée.

~Shine~, a row, or disturbance.

~Shine~, “to take the SHINE out of a person,” to surpass or excel him.

~Shiners~, sovereigns, or money.

~Shiney rag~, “to win the SHINEY RAG,” to be ruined,—said in gambling,
when any one continues betting after “luck has set in against him.”

~Shin-plaster~, a bank-note. Originally an Americanism.

~Shins.~ “To break one’s SHINS,” figurative expression meaning to borrow
money.

~Ship-shape~, proper, in good order; sometimes the phrase is varied to
“SHIP-SHAPE and Bristol fashion.”—_Sea._ The latter portion of the
expression went out with Bristol’s fame as a seaport.

~Shirty~, ill-tempered, or cross. When one person makes another in an
ill-humour he is said to have “got his SHIRT out.”

~Shivering Jemmy~, the name given by street-folk to any cadger who
exposes himself, half naked, on a cold day, to obtain alms. The “game”
is unpleasant, but was, before exposure of a different kind spoilt it,
exceedingly lucrative.

~Shockhead~, a head of long, unkempt, and rough hair.

~Shoddy~, old cloth worked up into new; made from soldiers’ and
policemen’s coats. The old cloth is pulled to pieces, the yarn
unravelled and carded over again. This produces shoddy, which is very
short in the fibre, and from it are produced, on again twisting and
weaving, cloth fabrics used for ladies’ mantles, &c. Also, a term of
derision applied to workmen in woollen factories.—_Yorkshire._

~Shoddy~, the plutocracy created out of bogus contracts during the civil
war in the United States. The SHODDYITES enriched themselves at the
expense of their country in the most shameless manner, having most
likely studied under those contractors who should have supplied our
soldiers with necessaries during the Crimean War.

~Shoe~, to free or initiate a person,—a practice common in most trades
to a new-comer. The SHOEING consists in paying for beer, or other
liquor, which is drunk by the older hands. The cans emptied, and the
bill paid, the stranger is considered properly SHOD. SHOEING is a
variation of “paying one’s footing.”

~Shoe leather!~ a thief’s warning cry when he hears footsteps. This
exclamation is used in the spirit which animated the friend who, when he
suspected treachery towards Bruce at King Edward’s court, in 1306, sent
him a purse and a pair of spurs, as a sign that he should use them in
making his escape.

~Shoes~, “to die in one’s SHOES,” to be hanged. In the old hanging days
a highwayman would often kick off his shoes when the rope was round his
neck, so as—oh, vain and impotent attempt!—to defeat the prophecy that
had foreshadowed his present position.

~Shoes, children’s, to make~, to suffer oneself to be made sport of, or
depreciated. Commonly used in Norfolk.—_Cf._ Mrs. Behn’s comedy, _The
Roundheads_.

    _Hews._ “Who, pox! shall we stand MAKING CHILDREN’S SHOES all the
    year? No: let’s begin to settle the nation, I say, and go
    through-stitch with our work.”

~Shoful~, a Hansom cab. This favourite carriage was the invention of a
Mr. Hansom, afterwards connected with the _Builder_ newspaper. It has
been asserted that the term SHOFUL was derived from “shovel,” the
earliest slang term applied to Hansoms by other cab-drivers, who
conceived their shape to be after the fashion of a scoop or shovel. A
logical friend of the present Editor’s argues thus:—SHOFUL, full of
show, _ergo_, beautiful—handsome—Hansom. This is clever, but it
certainly never entered into the heads of those who gave the name of
SHOFUL to the Hansom cabs.

~Shoful~, bad or counterfeit money. Perhaps, as some think, from the
_Danish_, SKUFFE, to shove, to deceive, cheat; _Saxon_, SCUFAN,—whence
the _English_, SHOVE. The term, however, is possibly one of the many
street words from the _Hebrew_ (through the low Jews); SHEPHEL, in that
language, signifying a low or debased estate. _Chaldee_, SHAPHAL.—_See_
Psalm cxxxvi. 23, “in our low estate.” A correspondent suggests a very
probable derivation, from the _German_, SCHOFEL, trash, rubbish,—the
_German_ adjective, SCHOFELIG, being the nearest possible translation
of our shabby. SHOFUL means anything mock, as SHOFUL jewellery. A SHOFUL
is also a humbug, an impostor.

~Shoful-pitcher~, a passer of bad money. SHOFUL-PITCHING, passing bad
money. “Snide-pitcher” and “Snide-pitching” are terms exchangeable with
the preceding.

~Shoful pullet~, a “gay” or unsteady woman, especially a young woman.

~Sholl~, to bonnet one, or crush a person’s hat over his eyes.—_North._

~Shool~, to saunter idly, to become a vagabond, to beg rather than
work.—_Smollett’s Roderick Random_, vol. i., p. 262.

~Shool~, Jews’ term for their synagogue.

~Shoot the cat~, to vomit. From a story of a man being sick in the back
yard, and suffocating a cat and all her kittens.

~Shoot the moon~, to remove furniture from a house in the night without
paying the landlord.

~Shop.~ In racing slang, to secure first, second, or third position in a
race, is to get a SHOP. This is also known as a place, and as a
situation. _See_ PLACE.

~Shop~, a house. “How are they all at your SHOP?” is a common question
among small tradesmen.

~Shop~, the House of Commons. The only instance we have met with of the
use of this word in literature occurs in Mr. Trollope’s _Framley
Parsonage:_—

    “‘If we are merely to do as we are bid, and have no voice of our
    own, I don’t see what’s the good of our going to the SHOP at all,’
    said Mr. Sowerby.”

~Shop~, to discharge a shopman. In military slang, to SHOP an officer is
to put him under arrest in the guard-room. In pugilistic slang, to
punish a man severely is “to knock him all over the SHOP,” _i.e._, the
ring, the place in which the work is done.

~Shop-bouncer~, or SHOP-LIFTER, a person generally respectably attired,
who, while being served with a small article at a shop, steals one of
more value. Shakspeare has the word LIFTER, a thief.

~Shop-walker~, a person employed to walk up and down a shop, to hand
seats to customers, and see that they are properly served. Contracted
also to WALKER.

~Shopping~, purchasing at shops. Termed by Todd a slang word, but used
by Cowper and Byron.

~Shoppy~, to be full of nothing but one’s own calling or profession; “to
talk SHOP,” to converse of nothing but professional subjects.

~Short~, when spirit is drunk without any admixture of water, it is said
to be taken “SHORT;” “summat SHORT,” a dram. A similar phrase is used at
the counters of banks; upon presenting a cheque, the clerk asks, “How
will you take it?” _i.e._, in gold, or notes. If in notes, long or
short? Should it be desired to receive it in notes for the largest
possible amount, the answer is, SHORT. A conductor of an omnibus, or any
other servant, is said to be SHORT when he does not give all the money
he receives to his master.

~Short~, hard-up; a polite term for impecuniosity used in clubs and
among military men.

~Short commons~, short allowance of food. _See_ COMMONS.

~Shorter~, one who makes a dishonest profit by reducing the coin of the
realm by clipping and filing. From a crown-piece a SHORTER could gain
5d. Another way was by chemical means: a guinea laid in aquafortis
would, in twelve hours, precipitate 9d.-worth of sediment; in
twenty-four, 1s. 6d.-worth.—_Rommany Rye._

~Shot~, from the modern sense of the word to SHOOT,—a guess, a random
conjecture; “to make a bad SHOT,” to expose one’s ignorance by making a
wrong guess, or random answer, without knowing whether it is right or
wrong.

~Shot~, from the once general, but now provincial word, to SHOOT, to
subscribe, contribute in fair proportion;—a share, from the
_Anglo-Saxon_ word, SCEAT; “to pay one’s SHOT,” _i.e._, share of the
reckoning, &c.

    “Yet still while I have got
    Enough to pay the SHOT
    Of Boniface, both gruff and greedy O!”

        _Fisher’s Garland_ for 1835.

~Shot~, “I wish I may be SHOT, if,” &c., a common form of mild swearing.

~Shot~, a term used among horse chaunters. To SHOT a horse, is to give
him a lot of small shot, which will for a short time effectually “open
his pipes,” and make him appear sound in wind.

~Shot in the locker~, money in pocket, resource of any kind in
store.—_Navy._

~Shoulder~, when a servant embezzles his master’s money, he is said to
SHOULDER his employer.

~Shout~, to pay for drink round. “It’s my SHOUT,” says he who pays.
Possibly because the payer originally SHOUTED to the bar-keeper of an
hotel to score the drink to him.—_Australian_, but now general.

~Shove-halfpenny~, a gambling pot-house pastime, played on a table. A
very old game, originally called push-penny.

~Shove in the mouth~, a glass of spirits, which is taken off quickly and
at once.

~Shovel~, a term applied by the vulgar crowd to the inelegant twisted
hats worn by the dignitaries of the Church. Dean Alford says, “I once
heard a venerable dignitary pointed out by a railway porter as “an old
party in a SHOVEL.”—_Queen’s English._

~Shrimp~, a diminutive person.—_Chaucer._

~Shtumer~, a horse against which money may be laid without risk. _See_
SAFE UN.

~Shunt~, to avoid, to turn aside from. From the railway term.

~Shut of~, or SHOT OF, _i.e._, rid of. A very common expression amongst
the London lower orders. One costermonger will say to another:—“Well,
Ike, did yer get SHUT O’ them there gawfs [apples]?” _i.e._, did you
sell them all?

~Shut up!~ be quiet, don’t make a noise; to stop short, to cease in a
summary manner, to silence effectually. The following is from a literary
paper:—“Only the other day we heard of a preacher who, speaking of the
scene with the doctors in the Temple, remarked that the Divine disputant
completely SHUT THEM UP!” SHUT UP, utterly exhausted, done for.

~Shy~, a throw. _See_ the following:—

~Shy~, to fling; COCK-SHY, a game at fairs, consisting of throwing short
sticks at trinkets or cocoanuts set upon other sticks,—both name and
practice derived from the old game of throwing or SHYING at live cocks.
This game is best known to the London public as “three shies a penny.”

~Shy.~ “To fight SHY of a person,” to avoid his society either from
dislike, fear, or other reason. SHY has also the sense of flighty,
unsteady, untrustworthy.

~Shy~, to stop suddenly, or turn off, as a horse does when frightened.

~Shyster~, a duffer, a vagabond. Variation of “shicer.”

~Sices~, or SIZES, a throw of sixes at dice.

~Sick as a horse~, a popular simile,—curious, because a horse never
vomits.

~Sickener~, a dose too much of anything. Too much of even a good thing
will make a man sick.

~Side~, an affirmative expression in the cant language of the northern
towns. “Do you stoll the gammy?” (Do you understand cant?) “SIDE, cove”
(yes, mate).

~Side-boards~, or STICK-UPS, shirt collars. Name applied some years ago,
before the present style of collars came into fashion.

~Sift~, to embezzle small coins, those which might pass through a
sieve—as threepennies and fourpennies—and which are, therefore, not
likely to be missed.

~Sight~, “to take a SIGHT at a person,” a vulgar action employed by boys
and others to denote incredulity, or contempt for authority, by placing
the thumb against the nose and extending the fingers, which are agitated
in token of derision.

    “The sacristan he says no word that indicates a doubt,
    But he puts his finger to his nose, and spreads his fingers out.”

        _Nell Cook._

~Silly season~, the period when nobody is supposed to be in London, when
there are no parliamentary debates to publish, and when editors are at
their wits’-ends to fill their papers with readable matter. All kinds of
crazes on political and social subjects are then ventilated, gigantic
gooseberries, monstrous births, and strange showers then become
plentiful, columns are devoted to matters which would not at any other
time receive consideration, and, so far as the newspapers are concerned,
silliness is at a premium.

~Silver beggar~, or LURKER, a vagabond who travels through the country
with “briefs” containing false statements of losses by fire, shipwrecks,
accidents, &c. Forged documents are exhibited with signatures of
magistrates and clergymen. Accompanying these are sham subscription
books. The former, in beggar parlance, is termed “a sham,” whilst the
latter is denominated “a delicate.”

~Sim~, one of a Methodistical turn in religion; a Low Churchman;
originally a follower of the late Rev. Charles Simeon.—_Cambridge._

~Simon~, a sixpenny-piece.

~Simon~, or SIMPLE SIMON, a credulous, gullible person. A character in a
song, but now common.

~Simon Pure~, “the real SIMON PURE,” the genuine article. Those who have
witnessed Mr. Charles Mathews’s performance in Mrs. Centlivre’s
admirable comedy of _A Bold Stroke for a Wife_, and the laughable
coolness with which he, the false SIMON PURE, assuming the Quaker dress
and character of the real one, elbows that worthy out of his expected
entertainment, will at once perceive the origin of this phrase.—_See_
act v. scene i.

~Simpkin~, or SIMKIN, champagne.—_Anglo-Indian._ Derived from the
manner in which native servants pronounce champagne.

~Simpson~, water used in the dilution of milk. Term in use among
cow-keepers. From this the parish pump has been called Mrs. SIMPSON.

~Sing out~, to call aloud.—_Sea._

~Sing small~, to lessen one’s boasting, and turn arrogance into
humility.

~Sing-song~, a harmonic meeting at a pot-house, a free-and-easy.

~Sinkers~, bad money,—affording a man but little assistance in “keeping
afloat.”

~Sinks~, a throw of fives at dice. _French_, CINQ.

~Si quis~, a candidate for “orders.” From the notification commencing SI
QUIS—if any one.

~Sir Harry~, a close stool.

~Sir Reverence~, a corruption of the old phrase, SAVE YOUR REVERENCE, a
sort of apology for alluding to anything likely to shock one’s sense of
decency. _Latin_, SALVÂ REVERENTIÂ. _See_ Shakspeare’s _Romeo and
Juliet_, act i. scene iv. From this it came to mean the thing
itself—human ordure generally, but sometimes other indecencies.

~Siserara~, a hard blow.—_Suffolk._ Many derive this term from the
story of Sisera in the Old Testament, but it is probably a corruption of
CERTIORARI, a Chancery writ reciting a complaint of hard usage.

~Sit under~, a term employed in Dissenters’ meeting-houses, to denote
attendance on the ministry of any particular preacher.

~Sit upon~, to overcome or rebuke, to express contempt for a man in a
marked manner. Also, to chaff or “roast” a man consumedly.

~Sit-upons~, trousers. _See_ INEXPRESSIBLES.

~Sivvy~, “’pon my SIVVY,” _i.e._, upon my soul or honour. Corruption of
“asseveration,” like DAVY, which is an abridgment of “affidavit.”

~Sixes and sevens~, articles in confusion are said to be all SIXES AND
SEVENS. The Deity is mentioned in the _Towneley Mysteries_ as He that
“set all on seven,” _i.e._, set or appointed everything in seven days. A
similar phrase at this early date implied confusion and disorder, and
from these, Halliwell thinks, has been derived the phrase “to be at
SIXES AND SEVENS.” A Scotch correspondent, however, states that the
phrase probably came from the workshop, and that amongst needle-makers,
when the points and eyes are “heads and tails” (“heeds and thraws”), or
in confusion, they are said to be SIXES AND SEVENS, because those
numbers are the sizes most generally used, and in the course of
manufacture have frequently to be distinguished.

~Sixty~, “to go along like SIXTY,” _i.e._, at a good rate, briskly.

~Sixty-per-cent~, a bill-discounter. From the rate of interest generally
charged. If bill-discounters profess to do the business for less, they
generally make up the level sixty by extras.

~Six-water grog~, a sea-term for the weakest grog possible—six portions
of water to one of rum—hardly enough spirit to “swear by.”

~Size~, to order extras over and above the usual commons at the dinner
in college halls. Soup, pastry, &c., are SIZINGS, and are paid for at
a certain specified rate per SIZE, or portion, to the college cook.
Peculiar to Cambridge. Minsheu says, “SIZE, a farthing which schollers
in Cambridge have at the buttery, noted with the letter _s_.”

~Sizers~, or SIZARS, certain poor scholars at Cambridge, annually
elected, who got their dinners (including “sizings”) from what was left
at the upper, or Fellows’ table, free, or nearly so. They paid rent of
rooms, and some other fees, on a lower scale than the “Pensioners” or
ordinary students, and were equal with the “battlers” and “servitors” at
Oxford.

~Sizings.~ _See_ SIZE.

~Skedaddle~, to go off in a hurry. The American war introduced this new
and amusing word. A Northerner who retreated “retired upon his
supports,” but a Southerner was said to SKEDADDLE. The _Times_ remarked
on the word, and Lord Hill wrote to prove that it was excellent Scotch.
The Americans only misapply the word, which means, in Dumfries, “to
spill”—milkmaids, for example, saying, “You are SKEDADDLING all that
milk.” The Yankees therefore adopted the term, and altered the
application.

~Skid~, a sovereign. Fashionable slang. Occasionally SKIV.

~Skid~, or SKIDPAN, an instrument for locking the wheel of a coach when
going down hill. It is often said that a talkative person might put the
SKID on, with advantage to his listeners, if not to himself.

~Skied~, or SKYED, thrown upwards, as “coppers” in tossing.

~Skied.~ Artists say that a picture is SKIED when it is hung on the
upper line at the Exhibition of the Royal Academy. _See_ FLOORED.

~Skilligolee~, prison gruel. Also sailors’ soup of many ingredients. The
term is occasionally used in London workhouses.

~Skilly~, abbreviation of SKILLIGOLEE.

~Skimmery~, St. Mary Hall, Oxford.—_University._

~Skin~, a purse. This term is mostly in use among thieves.

~Skin~, to abate, or lower the value of anything; “thin-SKINNED,”
sensitive, touchy, liable to be “raw” on certain subjects.

~Skin-the-lamb~, a game at cards, a very expressive corruption of the
term “lansquenet,” also a racing term. When a non-favourite wins a race,
bookmakers are said to SKIN THE LAMB, under the supposition that they
win all their bets, no person having backed the winner. This has been
corrupted into SKINNER.

~Skinflint~, an old and popular simile for a “close-fisted,” stingy
person. Sternberg, in his _Northamptonshire Glossary_, says the Eastern
languages have the same expression. Abdul-Malek, one of the Ommeyade
Khaliphs, noted for his extreme avarice, was surnamed Raschal-Hegiarah,
literally, “the SKINNER of a FLINT.”

~Skinner~, a term among bookmakers. “May we have a SKINNER,” _i.e._, may
we SKIN THE LAMB, which _see_.

~Skipper~, the master of a vessel. _Germ._, SCHIFFER, from SCHIFF, a
ship; sometimes used as synonymous with “governor.”

~Skipper~, a barn.—_Ancient Cant._ From the _Welsh_, YSGUBOR,
pronounced SCYBOR, or SCIBOR, the proper word in that language for a
barn.

~Skipper-birds~, or KEYHOLE-WHISTLERS, persons who sleep in barns or
outhouses from necessity or in preference to sleeping in lodging-houses.

~Skipper-it~, to sleep in the open air, or in a rough way.

~Skit~, a joke, a squib. Term generally used in reference to any pungent
or pointed political allusion.

~Skittles~, a game similar to that of Ten Pins, which, when interdicted
by the Government, was altered to Nine Pins, or SKITTLES. The pins are
set up in an alley, and thrown (not bowled) at with a round piece of
hard wood, shaped like a small flat cheese. The costers used to consider
themselves the best players in London, but they have been frequently
undeceived. SKITTLES has within the past few years received an awful
blow—quite a floorer—from “the powers that be.”

~Skow-banker~, a fellow who loiters about the premises of any one
willing to support him, and who objects to the necessity of working for
his living; a rogue, a rascal. Common in Melbourne, Australia.

~Skrouge~, to push or squeeze.—_North._

~Skull-thatcher~, a straw-bonnet-maker,—sometimes called “a
bonnet-BUILDER.”

~Skunk~, a mean or paltry fellow, one whose name stinks.

~Sky~, a disagreeable person, an enemy.—_Westminster School._ The word
derived its origin from a corruption of the last syllable of the word
“VOLSCI:” Westminster boys being of course understood to be the Romans.

~Sky~, to toss up towards the SKY. Term used in tossing with halfpence;
“It’s all right, Jim SKIED the browns,” _i.e._, threw them up, a proof
that there could have been no collusion or cheating.

~Sky-blue~, London milk much diluted with water, or from which the cream
has been too closely skimmed.

    “Hence, Suffolk dairy wives run mad for cream,
    And leave their milk with nothing but the name;
    Its name derision and reproach pursue,
    And strangers tell of three-times-skimm’d—SKY-BLUE.”

        _Bloomfield’s Farmer’s Boy._

The recent Adulteration Act has done away with SKY-BLUE, and made
Simpson a relic of the past. SKY-BLUE formerly meant gin.

~Sky-lark.~ _See under_ LARK.

~Sky-parlour~, the garret.

~Sky-scraper~, a tall man; “Are you cold up there, old SKY-SCRAPER?”
Properly a sea-term. The light sails, which some adventurous skippers
set above the royals in calm latitudes, are termed SKY-SCRAPERS and
MOON-RAKERS.

~Sky-wannocking~, unsteady frolicking.—_Norfolk._

~Slab~, thick, as gruel, porridge, &c.

~Slack~, “to hold on the SLACK,” to skulk; a slack rope not requiring to
be held.—_Sea._

~Slam~, a term at the game of whist. When two partners gain the whole
thirteen tricks, they win a SLAM, which is considered equal to a
rubber.

~Slam~, to talk fluently. “He’s the bloke to SLAM.” From a term in use
among birdsingers at the East-end, by which they denote a certain style
of note in chaffinches.

~Slammock~, a slattern or awkward person.—_West_, and _Norfolk_.

~Slang~, low, vulgar, unwritten, or unauthorized language. _Gipsy_,
SLANG, the secret language of the gipsies, synonymous with GIBBERISH,
another gipsy word. The word is only to be found in the dictionaries of
Webster and Ogilvie. It is given, however, by Grose, in his _Dictionary
of the Vulgar Tongue_, 1785. SLANG, since it has been adopted as an
English word, generally implies vulgar language not known or recognised
as CANT; and latterly, when applied to speech, it has superseded the
word FLASH. Latterly, however, SLANG has become the generic term for all
unauthorized language. The earliest instance of the use of the word that
can be found, is the following:—

    “Let proper nurses be assigned, to take care of these babes of
    grace, [young thieves].... The master who teaches them should be a
    man well versed in the cant language commonly called the SLANG
    patter, in which they should by all means excel.”—_Jonathan Wild’s
    Advice to his Successor._ LONDON, _J. Scott_, 1758.

~Slang~, a travelling show.

~Slang~, to cheat, to abuse in foul language.

~Slang~, counterfeit or short weights and measures. A SLANG quart is a
pint and a half. SLANG measures are lent out at 2d. per day to street
salesmen. The term is used principally by costermongers.

~Slang~, a watch-chain. SUPER and SLANG, a watch and chain.

~Slang~, “out on the SLANG,” _i.e._, to travel with a hawker’s licence.

~Slang-whanger~, a long-winded speaker.—_Parliamentary._

~Slangy~, flashy, vulgar; loud in dress, manner, and conversation.

~Slantingdicular~, oblique, awry,—as opposed to PERPENDICULAR.
Originally an Americanism, now a part of the vocabulary of London “high
life below stairs.”

~Slap~, paint for the face, rouge.

~Slap~, exactly, precisely; “SLAP in the wind’s eye,” _i.e._, exactly to
windward.

~Slap-bang~, suddenly, violently. From the strike of a ball being felt
before the report reaches the ear,—the SLAP first, the BANG afterwards.

~Slap-bang-shops~, originally low eating-houses where the ready-money
was paid down with a SLAP-BANG.—_Grose._ A SLAP-BANG-SHOP is now a very
pretentious eating-house.

~Slap-dash~, immediately, or quickly; at a great rate.

~Slap-up~, first-rate, excellent, very good.

~Slasher~, a powerful roysterer, a game and clever pugilist.

~Slashers~, the Twenty-eighth Regiment of Foot in the British army.

~Slate~, “he has a SLATE loose,” _i.e._, he is slightly crazy.

~Slate~, to pelt with abuse, to beat, to “lick;” or, in the language of
the reviewers, to “cut up.” Also, among bettors, to lay heavily against
a particular man or animal in a race.

~Slate~, to knock the hat over one’s eyes, to bonnet.—_North._

~Slavey~, a maid-servant.

~Slawmineyeux~, a Dutchman. Probably a corruption of the Dutch, _ja,
mynheer_; or German, _ja, mein Herr_.—_Sea._

~Sleepless-hats~, those of a napless character, better known as
WIDE-AWAKES.

~Slender~, a simple country gentleman.—_Shakspeare._

~Slewed~, drunk, or intoxicated.—_Sea term._ When a vessel changes the
tack, she, as it were, staggers, the sails flap, she gradually heels
over, and the wind catching the waiting canvas, she glides off at
another angle. The course pursued by an intoxicated, or SLEWED, man, is
supposed to be analogous to that of the ship.

~Slick~, an Americanism, very prevalent in England since the publication
of Judge Haliburton’s facetious stories, which means rapidly,
effectually, utterly.

~Slick~, smooth, unctuous; abbreviation of sleek.

~Sling~, a drink peculiar to Americans, generally composed of gin,
soda-water, ice, and slices of lemon. At some houses in London
GIN-SLINGS may be obtained.

~Sling~, to pass from one person to another. To blow the nose with the
naked fingers.

~Sling your hook~, a polite invitation to move-on. “Sling your Daniel”
has the same meaning. The pronouns may be altered to suit the context.

~Slip~, “to give the SLIP,” to run away, or elude pursuit. Shakspeare
has, “You gave me the counterfeit,” in _Romeo and Juliet_. Giving the
SLIP, however, is a sea phrase, and refers to fastening an anchor and
chain cable to a floating buoy, or water-cask, until a time arrives when
it is convenient to return and take them on board. In fastening the
cable, the home end is SLIPPED through the hawse-pipe. Weighing anchor
is a noisy task, so that giving the SLIP infers leaving quietly.

~Slip~, or let SLIP; “to SLIP into a man,” to give him a sound beating,
“to let SLIP at a cove,” to rush violently upon him, and assault with
vigour.

~Slipping~, a trick of card-sharpers, in the performance of which, by
dexterous manipulation, they place the cut card on the top, instead of
at the bottom of the pack. It is the _faire sauter la coupe_ of the
French. In pugilistic parlance, “to SLIP a man,” is to “duck and get
away” with great dexterity.

~Slips~, the sides of the gallery in a theatre are generally so called.

~Slog~, to beat or baste, to fight. _German_, SCHLACHTEN; or perhaps
from some connexion with the _Gaelic_ SLOGAN. The pretended _Greek_
derivation from σλογω is humbug, there being no such word in the
language.

~Slogdollager~, an Americanism, meaning the same as our STOCKDOLLAGER,
which _see_.

~Sloggers~, _i.e._, SLOW-GOERS, the second division of race-boats at
Cambridge. At Oxford they are called TORPIDS.—_University._ A hard
hitter at cricket is termed a SLOGGER; so is a pugilist.

~Slogging~, a good beating.

~Slop~, a policeman. At first back slang, but now modified for general
use.

~Slop~, cheap, or ready-made, as applied to clothing, is generally
supposed to be a modern appropriation; but it was used in this sense in
1691, by Maydman, in his _Naval Speculations_; and by Chaucer two
centuries before that. SLOPS properly signify sailors’ working clothes,
which are of a very cheap and inexpensive character.

~Slope~, to decamp, to run, or rather slip away. Some persons think it
came originally from LOPE, to make off; and that the _s_ probably became
affixed as a portion of the preceding word, as in the case of “Let’s
lope,” let us run. It is purely an Americanism, and is possibly but an
emendation of our own word elope. Lope, leap, and elope are kindred. A
humorous correspondent says that Tennyson is decidedly partial to slang,
and instances amongst other proofs a passage from the laureate’s famous
_Locksley Hall_:—

    “Many a night, from yonder ivied casement, ere I went to rest,
    Did I look on great Orion SLOPING slowly to the west.”

Though this correspondent may not have intended it, his joke has given
the key to the situation, and has shown how our cousins most probably
came to use the word in its present sense. “The sun is SLOPING fast.”

~Slops~, any weak, wet, and warm mixture. Hard drinkers regard all
effeminate beverages as SLOPS.

~Slops~, chests or packages of tea; “he shook a slum of SLOPS,” _i.e._,
stole a chest of tea. Also ready-made clothes—the substantive of SLOP.

~Slops~, liquid house-refuse.

~Slopshop~, a tailor’s shop where inferior work is done, and where cheap
goods are sold.

~Slour~, to lock, or fasten.—_Prison Cant._

~Sloured~, buttoned up; SLOURED HOXTER, an inside pocket buttoned up.

~Slowcoach~, a lumbering, dull person; one slow of comprehension.

~Slowed~, to be locked up (in prison).

~Slubberdegullion~, a paltry, dirty, sorry wretch.

    “Quoth she, although thou hast deserved,
    Base SLUBBERDEGULLION, to be served
    As thou didst vow to deal with me,
    If thou hadst got the victory”----

        _Hudibras._

~Sluicery~, a gin-shop or public-house.

~Sluicing one’s bolt~, drinking.

~Slum~, a chest, or package. _See_ SLOPS.

~Slum~, a letter.—_Prison Cant._

~Slum~, an insinuation, a discreditable innuendo.

~Slum~, gammon, “up to SLUM,” wide awake, knowing.

    “And this, without more SLUM began,
    Over a flowing pot-house can,
    To settle, without botheration,
    The rigs of this here tip-top nation.”

        _Jack Randall’s Diary_, 1820.

~Slum~, or BACK SLUM, a dark retreat, a low neighbourhood; as
Westminster and East-end SLUMS, favourite haunts for thieves.

~Slum~, to hide, to pass to a confederate.

~Slum~, to saunter about, with a suspicion, perhaps, of immoral
pursuits.—_Cambridge University Slang_.

~Slum the gorger~, to cheat on the sly, to be an eye-servant. SLUM in
this sense is old cant.

~Slumgullion~, any cheap, nasty, washy beverage. An Americanism best
known in the Pacific States.

~Slumming~, passing bad money.

~Slush~, the grease obtained from boiling the salt pork eaten by seamen,
and generally the cook’s perquisite.

~Slushy~, a ship’s cook.

~Sluter~, butter.—_North._

~Smack smooth~, even, level with the surface, quickly.

~Small-beer;~ “he doesn’t think SMALL-BEER of himself,” _i.e._, he has a
great opinion of his own importance. SMALL COALS is also used in the
same sense.

~Small hours~, the early hours after midnight.

~Small potatoes~, a term of contempt. “He’s very SMALL POTATOES,” he’s a
nobody. Yet no one thinks of calling an important personage “large
POTATOES.”

~Smalls~, a University term for the first general examination of the
student. It is used at Cambridge, but properly belongs to Oxford. The
Cambridge term is “little go.”

~Smash~, to become bankrupt, or worthless; “to go all to SMASH,” to
break, “go to the dogs,” or fall in pieces.

~Smash~, to pass counterfeit money.

~Smasher~, one who passes bad coin, or forged notes.

~Smashfeeder~, a Britannia-metal spoon,—the best imitation shillings
are made from this metal.

~Smash-man-Geordie~, a pitman’s oath.—_Durham_ and _Northumberland._ _See_
GEORDIE.

~Smeller~, the nose; “a blow on the SMELLER” is often to be found in
pugilistic records. Otherwise a NOSE-ENDER.

~Smish~, a shirt, or chemise.

~Smithers~, or SMITHEREENS; “all to SMITHEREENS,” all to smash, SMITHER
is a Lincolnshire word for a fragment.

~Smock-face~, a white delicate face,—a face without whiskers.

~Smoke~, London. From the peculiar dense cloud which overhangs London.
The metropolis is by no means so smoky as Sheffield, Birmingham, &c.;
yet country-people, when going to London, frequently say they are on
their way to the SMOKE; and Londoners, when leaving for the country, say
they are going out of the SMOKE.

~Smoke~, to detect, or penetrate an artifice. Originally used by London
detectives, probably on account of their clouded intellects.

~Smudge~, to smear, obliterate, daub. Corruption of SMUTCH.

~Smug~, smuggling.—_Anglo-Chinese._

~Smug~, extremely neat, after the fashion, in order.

~Smug~, sleek, comfortable. Term often applied to a seemingly pious
humbug, more of the Chadband than the Stiggins.

~Smuggings~, snatchings, or purloinings,—shouted out by boys, when
snatching the tops, or small play property, of other lads, and then
running off at full speed.

    “Tops are in; spin ’em agin.
    Tops are out; SMUGGING’S about.”

~Smut~, a copper boiler. Also, the “blacks” from a furnace.

~Smutty~, obscene,—vulgar as applied to conversation. Variation of
dirty.

~Snack~, a share or division of plunder. To “go SNACKS,” to divide
equally. Also, a light repast.—_Old Cant_ and _Gipsy term_.

~Snack~, to quiz or chaff with regard to a particular weakness or recent
transaction. As a substantive in this sense SNACK means an innuendo.

~Snaffle~, conversation on professional or private subjects which the
rest of the company cannot appreciate. In _East Anglia_, to SNAFFLE is
to talk foolishly.

~Snaffled~, arrested, “pulled up,”—so termed from a kind of horse’s
bit called a SNAFFLE.

~Snaggle teeth~, those that are uneven, and unpleasant looking.—_West._

~Snaggling~, angling after geese with a hook and line, the bait being a
worm or snail. The goose swallows the bait, and is quietly landed and
bagged. See Seymour’s _Sketches_.

~Snaggy~, cross, crotchety, malicious.

~Snam~, to snatch, or rob from the person. Mostly used to describe that
kind of theft which consists in picking up anything lying about, and
making off with it rapidly.

~Snaps~, share, portion; any articles or circumstances out of which
money may be made; “looking out for SNAPS,” waiting for windfalls, or
odd jobs.—_Old._ _Scotch_, CHITS, term also used for “coppers,” or
halfpence.

~Snapps~, spirits. _Dutch_, SCHNAPPS. The word, as originally
pronounced, is used by East-end Jews to describe any kind of spirits,
and the Gentiles get as near as they can.

~Sneaksman~, a shoplifter; a petty, cowardly thief.

~Sneeze-lurker~, a thief who throws snuff in a person’s face, and then
robs him.

~Sneezer~, a snuff-box; a pocket-handkerchief.

~Snell-fencer~, a street salesman of needles. SNELLS are needles.

~Snick-ersnee~, a knife.—_Sea._ Thackeray uses the term in his humorous
ballad of _Little Billee_.

~Snicker~, a drinking-cup. A HORN-SNICKER, a drinking-horn.

~Snid~, a sixpence.—_Scotch._

~Snide~, bad, spurious, contemptible. As, “a SNIDE fellow,” “SNIDE
coin,” &c. Also used as a substantive, as, “He’s a SNIDE,” though this
seems but a contraction of SNIDE ’UN.

~Snigger~, to laugh in a covert manner. Also a mild form of
swearing,—“I’m SNIGGERED if you will.” Another form of this latter is
JIGGERED.

~Sniggering~, laughing to oneself.—_East._

~Snip~, a tailor,—apparently from SNIPES, a pair of scissors, or from
the snipping sound made by scissors in cutting up anything.

~Snipe~, a long bill or account; also a term for attorneys,—a race with
a remarkable propensity for long bills.

~Snipes~, “a pair of SNIPES,” a pair of scissors. They are occasionally
made in the form of a snipe.

~Snitch~, to give information to the police, to turn approver. SNITCHING
is synonymous in thieves’ slang with “nosing” and “peaching.”

~Snitchers~, persons who turn Queen’s evidence, or who tell tales. In
_Scotland_, SNITCHERS signify handcuffs.

~Snob~, a low, vulgar, or affected person. Supposed to be from the
nickname usually applied to a cobbler or maker of shoes; but believed
by many in its later sense to be a contraction of the _Latin_, SINE
OBOLO. Others go to work for an etymology thus:—They assume that NOBS,
_i.e._, _nobiles_, was appended in lists to the names of persons of
gentle birth, whilst those who had not that distinction were marked down
as S NOB, _i.e._, _sine nobilitate_, without marks of gentility,—thus,
by a simple transposition, quite reversing the meaning. Others, again,
remark that, as at college sons of noblemen wrote after their names in
the admission lists, _fil. nob._, son of a lord, and hence all young
noblemen were called NOBS, and what they did NOBBY, so those who
imitated them would be called _quasi-nobs_, “like a nob,” which by a
process of contraction would be shortened to _si-nob_, and then SNOB,
one who pretends to be what he is not, and apes his betters. The short
and expressive terms which many think fitly represent the three great
estates of the realm—NOB, SNOB, and MOB—were all originally slang
words. The last has safely passed through the vulgar ordeal of the
streets, and found respectable quarters in the standard dictionaries.
For fuller particulars of the genus SNOB, in all its ramifications, the
reader cannot do better than apply to the general works of that great
master of the subject, William Makepeace Thackeray, though it may be as
well to remark that the SNOB for whom the novelist had such an aversion
is now very widely known as “cad.”

~Snobbish~, stuck up, proud, make-believe.

~Snob-Stick~, a workman who refuses to join in strikes, or trade-unions.
Amplification of KNOB-STICK.

~Snooks~, an imaginary personage often brought forward as the answer to
an idle question, or as the perpetrator of a senseless joke. Said to be
simply a shortening or abbreviation of “Sevenoaks,” the Kentish village.

~Snooze~, or SNOODGE (vulgar pronunciation), to sleep or doze.

~Snooze-case~, a pillow-slip.

~Snorter~, a blow on the nose. A hurry is sometimes called a “reg’lar
SNORTER.”

~Snot~, a term of reproach applied to persons by the vulgar when vexed
or annoyed, meaning really a person of the vilest description and
meanest capacity. In a Westminster school vocabulary for boys, published
in the last century, the term is curiously applied. Its proper meaning
is the glandular mucus discharged through the nose.

~Snot~, a small bream, a slimy kind of flat fish.—_Norwich._

~Snotter~, or WIPE-HAULER, a pickpocket whose chief fancy is for
gentlemen’s pocket-handkerchiefs.—_North._

~Snottinger~, a coarse word for a pocket-handkerchief. The German
_Schnupftuch_ is, however, nearly as plain. A handkerchief was also
anciently called a “muckinger” or “muckender,” and from that a
neckerchief was called a “neckinger.”

~Snow~, wet linen, or linen hung out to dry.—_Old Cant._

~Snow-gatherer~, or SNOW-DROPPER, a rogue who steals linen from hedges
and drying-grounds.

~Snuff~, “up to SNUFF,” knowing and sharp; “to take SNUFF,” to be
offended. Shakspeare uses SNUFF in the sense of anger, or passion.

~Snuff it~, to die. Term very common among the lower orders of London. A
fanciful variation of “putting one’s light out,” and used simply in
reference to the action of the person dying. Thus any one threatening to
murder another says, “I’ll put your light out,” or any one committing
suicide is said to “put his own light out;” but to “SNUFF IT” is always
to die from disease or accident. To “lay down one’s knife and fork,” to
“peg out,” or “give up,” are variations of this form of euphemism.

~Snuffy~, tipsy, drunk.

~Snuggle~, to lie closely and cosily.

~Snyder~, a tailor. _German_, SCHNEIDER.

~Soaker~, an habitual drunkard.

~Soap~, flattery. _See_ SOFT SOAP.

~Sober-water~, a jocular allusion to the uses of soda-water.

~Social evil~, a name for some years applied to our street-walking
system, in consequence of the articles in the newspapers which treat on
the evils of prostitution being so headed. A good story has been often
told on this subject, which will bear repeating:—“A well-known divine
and philanthropist was walking in a crowded street at night in order to
distribute tracts to promising subjects. A young woman was walking up
and down, and he accosted her. He pointed out to her the error of her
ways, implored her to reform, and tendered her a tract with fervent
entreaties to go home and read it. The girl stared at him for a moment
or two in sheer bewilderment; at last it dawned on her what he meant,
and for what he took her, and looking up in his face with simple
amazement, she exclaimed, ‘Lor’ bless you, sir, I ain’t a SOCIAL EVIL;
I’m waitin’ for the ’bus!’” The enthusiasm which was felt in this
direction a few years back has received considerable modification, as it
has been proved that the efforts of the promoters of midnight meetings
and other arrangements of a similar nature, praiseworthy though they
are, have little or no effect; and that the early-closing movement in
the Haymarket has done more to stamp out the SOCIAL EVIL than years of
preaching, even when accompanied by tea and buns, could ever have done.

~Sock~, the Eton College term for a treat, synonymous with “chuck” used
at Westminster and other schools. Believed to be derived from the
monkish word SOKE. An old writer speaks of a pious man “who did not SOKE
for three days,” meaning that he fasted. The word is still used by the
boys of Heriot’s Hospital School at Edinburgh, and signifies a
sweetmeat; being derived from the same source as sugar, _suck_, SUCRE,
&c.

~Sock~, credit. As, “He gets his goods on SOCK, while I pay ready.”

~Sock into him~, _i.e._, give him a good drubbing; “give him SOCK,”
_i.e._, thrash him well.

~Sockdolager.~ _See_ STOCKDOLLAGER.

~Socket-money~, money extorted by threats of exposure. To be applied to
for SOCKET-MONEY is perhaps one of the most terrible inflictions that
can befall a respectable man. SOCKETERS, as the applicants are called,
should be punished with the utmost possible severity.

~Sodom~, a nickname for Wadham, due to the similarity of the
sounds.—_Oxford University._

~Soft~, foolish, inexperienced. A term for bank-notes.

~Soft-horn~, a simpleton; literally a donkey, whose ears, the
substitutes of horns, are soft.

~Soft-sawder~, flattery easily laid on or received. Probably introduced
by Sam Slick.

~Soft-soap~, or soft-sawder, flattery, ironical praise.

~Soft-tack~, bread.—_Sea._

~Soft-tommy~, loaf-bread, in contradistinction to hard biscuit.

~Soiled doves~, the “Midnight Meeting” term for prostitutes and “gay”
ladies generally.

~Sold~, “SOLD again! and got the money,” gulled, deceived. _Vide_ SELL.

~Sold up~, or OUT, broken down, bankrupt.

~Soldier~, a red herring. Common term in seaport towns, where exchange
is made, a soldier being called by the fishy title.

~Something damp~, a dram, a drink.

~Son of a gun~, a familiar term for a man. Sometimes applied
eulogistically, never contemptuously. Generally said of an artful
person, and perhaps, originally, son of a “gun,” (or “gonnof”). In the
army it is sometimes applied to an artilleryman.

~Sonkey~, a clumsy, awkward fellow.

~Soor~, an abusive term. _Hindostanee_, a pig.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Soot-bag~, a reticule.

~Sop~, a soft or foolish man. Abbreviation of MILKSOP.

~Soph~ (abbreviation of “sophister”), a title peculiar to the University
of Cambridge. Undergraduates are junior SOPHS before passing their
“Little Go,” or first University examination,—senior SOPHS after that.

~Sort~, used in a slang sense thus—“That’s your SORT,” as a term of
approbation. “Pitch it into him, that’s your SORT,” _i.e._, that is the
proper kind of plan to adopt.

~So-so~, not particularly reputable. “A very SO-SO sort of a person,” a
person whom it is no advantage to know. “It was very SO-SO” (said of a
piece of work or an entertainment), it was neither good nor bad.

~Sound~, to pump, or draw information from a person in an artful manner.

~Souper~, an Irish Roman Catholic who pretends conversion—or
perversion—so as to obtain a share of the soup and blankets provided
for Protestants only by Christian missionaries. These recalcitrants are
also called “swaddlers.”

~Sou’-wester~, a hat with a projection behind. Much worn at sea in
“dirty” weather. A hat similar to that of a dustman or coalheaver, which
is called a “fantail.”

~Sov~, contraction of sovereign; much used in sporting parlance to
denote the amount of entrance money, forfeit, and added coin in
connexion with a race. In the published conditions of a race the word
SOVS is almost invariably used in preference to pounds, though in
reckoning the net value of a big stake, after its decision, the common £
is used.

~Sow~, the receptacle into which the liquid iron is poured in a
gun-foundry. The melted metal poured from it is termed PIG.

~Sow’s baby~, a pig; sixpence.

~Spanish~, money. Probably a relic of buccaneering days.

    “Save its synonyms SPANISH, blunt, stumpy, and rowdy.”—_Barham._

~Spank~, a smack, or hard slap.

~Spank~, to move along quickly; hence a fast horse or vessel is said to
be “a SPANKER to go.”

~Spanking~, large, fine, or strong; _e.g._, a SPANKING pace, a SPANKING
breeze, a SPANKING fellow.

~Sparks~, diamonds. Term much in use among the lower orders, and
generally applied to stones in rings and pins.

~Specklebellies~, Dissenters. A term used in Worcester and the North,
though the etymology seems unknown in either place.

~Specks~, damaged oranges.—_Costermonger’s term._

~Speech~, a tip or wrinkle on any subject. On the turf a man will wait
before investing on a horse until he “gets the SPEECH,” as to whether it
is going to try, or whether it has a good chance. To “give the SPEECH,”
is to communicate any special information of a private nature.

~Speel~, to run away, make off; “SPEEL the drum,” to go off with stolen
property.—_North._

~Spell~, a turn of work, an interval of time. “Take a SPELL at the
capstern.”—_Sea._ “He took a long SPELL at that tankard.” “After a long
SPELL.”

~Spell~, “to SPELL for a thing,” to hanker after it, to desire
possession.

~Spell~, to advertise, to put into print. “SPELT in the leer,” _i.e._,
advertised in the newspaper.

~Spell~, contracted from SPELLKEN. “Precious rum squeeze at the SPELL,”
_i.e._, a good evening’s work at the theatre, might be the remark of a
successful pickpocket.

~Spellken~, or SPEELKEN, a playhouse. German, SPIELEN. _See_ KEN.—_Don
Juan._

~Spick and span~, applied to anything that is quite new and
fresh.—_Hudibras._

~Spidireen~, the name of an imaginary ship, sometimes mentioned by
sailors. If a sailor be asked what ship he belongs to, and does not wish
to tell, he will most probably reply—“The SPIDIREEN frigate, with nine
decks, and ne’er a bottom.” _See_ MERRY DUN OF DOVER.

~Spierized~, to have your hair cut and shampooed, from the shop of
Spiers in High Street.—_Oxford University._

~Spiff~, a well-dressed man, a “swell.”

~Spiffed~, slightly intoxicated.—_Scotch Slang._

~Spiffs~, the per-centages allowed by drapers to their young men when
they effect a sale of old-fashioned or undesirable stock.

~Spiffy~, spruce, well-dressed, _tout à la mode_.

~Spifflicate~, to confound, silence, annihilate, or stifle. A corruption
of the last word, or of “suffocate.”

~Spike Park~, the Queen’s Bench Prison. _See_ BURDON’S HOTEL.

~Spill~, to throw from a horse or chaise. _See_ PURL.

~Spin~, to reject from an examination.—_Army._

~Spindleshanks~, a nickname for any one who has thin legs.

~Spin-’em rounds~, a street game consisting of a piece of brass, wood,
or iron, balanced on a pin, and turned quickly round on a board, when
the point, arrow-shaped, stops at a number, and decides the bet one way
or the other. The contrivance very much resembles a sea compass, and was
formerly the gambling accompaniment of London piemen. The apparatus then
was placed on the tin lids of their pie-cans, and the bets were
ostensibly for pies, but were frequently for “coppers,” or for beer when
two or three apprentices or porters happened to meet. An active and
efficient police have, however, changed all that now.

~Spiniken~, St. Giles’s Workhouse. “Lump,” Marylebone Workhouse. “Pan,”
St. Pancras. “Pan” and “Lump” are now terms applied to all workhouses by
tramps and costers.

~Spinning-house~, the place in Cambridge where street-walkers are locked
up, if found out after a certain time at night.

~Spirt~, or SPURT, “to put on a SPIRT,” to make an increased exertion
for a brief space, to attain one’s end; a nervous effort. Abbreviation
or shortening of SPIRIT, or allusion to a SPIRT of water, which dies
away as suddenly as it rises.

    “So here for a man to run well for a SPURT, and then to give over
    ... is enough to annul all his former proceedings, and to make him
    in no better estate than if he had never set foot into the good
    waies of God.”—_Gataker’s Spirituall Watch_, 4to. 1619, p. 10.

~Spitalfields’ breakfast.~ At the East-end of London this is understood
as consisting of a tight necktie and a short pipe. Amongst workmen it is
usual to tighten the apron string when no dinner is at hand. Hunters and
trappers always take in their belts when supplies are short. “An
Irishman’s dinner” is a low East-end term, and means a smoke and a visit
to the urinal. Sometimes the phrase is, “I’ll go out and count the
railings,” _i.e._, the park or area railings, mental instead of
maxillary exercise.

~Spitfire~, a passionate person.

~Splash~, complexion powder used by ladies to whiten their necks and
faces. The finest rice flour, termed in France _poudre de riz_, is
generally employed. _See_ SLAP.

~Splendiferous~, sumptuous, first-rate. SPLENDACIOUS sometimes used with
similar meanings.

~Splice~, to marry; “and the two shall become one flesh.”—_Sea._ Also,
a wife.

~Splice the main brace~, to take a drink.—_Sea._

~Split~, to inform against one’s companions, to tell tales. “To SPLIT
with a person,” to cease acquaintanceship; to quarrel. Also to divide a
bottle of aërated water; as, “two brandies and a soda SPLIT;” in which
case “to SPLIT with” a person has a very different meaning from that
just given.

~Split up~, long in the legs. Among athletes, a man with good length of
limb is said to be “well SPLIT UP.”

~Splodger~, a lout, an awkward countryman.

~Spoffy~, a bustling busybody is said to be SPOFFY.

~Sponge~, “to throw up the SPONGE,” to submit, to give over the
struggle,—from the practice of throwing up the SPONGE used to cleanse a
combatant’s face at a prize-fight, as a signal that the side on which
that particular SPONGE has been used has had enough—that the SPONGE is
no longer required.

~Spoon~, synonymous with SPOONEY. A SPOON has been defined to be “a
thing that touches a lady’s lips without kissing them.”

~Spooney~, a weak-minded and foolish person, effeminate or fond; “to be
SPOONEY on a girl,” to be foolishly attached to one.

~Spoons~, the condition of two persons who SPOON on each other, who are
deeply in love. “I see, it’s a case of SPOONS with them,” is a common
phrase when lovers are mentioned.

~Spoons~, a method of designating large sums of money, disclosed at the
Bankruptcy Court during the examination of the great leather failures of
Streatfield and Laurence in 1860-61. The origin of the phrase was stated
to be the reply of the bankrupt Laurence to an offer of accommodating
him with £5000,—“Oh, you are feeding me with a TEA-SPOON.” Hence, £5000
came to be known in the firm as a TEA-SPOON; £10,000, a DESSERT-SPOON;
£15,000, a TABLE-SPOON; and £20,000, as a GRAVY-SPOON. The public were
amused at this TEA-SPOON phraseology, but were disgusted that such
levity should cover a gigantic swindle of the kind. It came out in
evidence, however, that it was not the ordinary slang of the discount
world, but it may not improbably become so. To “take it with a SPOON,”
is to take anything in small quantities. The counsel for the defence in
the Tichborne perjury case was reminded a short time back by one of the
judges that he was using a TEA-SPOON instead of a shovel, to clear
through the evidence.

~Sport~, to exhibit, to wear, &c.,—a word which is made to do duty in a
variety of senses, especially at the Universities.—_See_ the _Gradus ad
Cantabrigiam_. “To SPORT a new tile;” “to SPORT an _Ægrotat_” (_i.e._, a
permission from the Dons to abstain from lectures, &c., on account of
illness); “to SPORT one’s oak,” to shut the outer door and exclude the
public,—especially duns and boring acquaintances. Common also in the
Inns of Court. _See Notes and Queries_, 2nd series, vol. viii. p. 492,
and _Gentleman’s Magazine_, December, 1794.

~Sport~, an American term for a gambler or turfite—more akin to our
sporting man than to our sportsman.

~Sporting door~, the outer door of chambers, also called the OAK. _See_
under SPORT.—_University._

~Spot~, to mark, to recognise. Originally an Americanism, but now
general. “I SPOTTED him (or it) at once.”

~Spotted~, to be known or marked by the police.

~Spout~, “up the SPOUT,” at the pawnbroker’s; SPOUTING, pawning. _See_
POP for origin.

~Spout~, to preach, or make speeches; SPOUTER, a preacher or lecturer.

~Sprat~, sixpence.

~Spread~, butter. Term with workmen and schoolboys. _See_ SCRAPE.

~Spread~, a lady’s shawl, an entertainment, a display of good things.

~Spread~, a meal. Sporting term for a dinner. A sporting man often
challenges another to compete with him at any athletic pursuit or
pastime, for so much wine and a SPREAD of large or small proportions.

~Spree~, a boisterous piece of merriment; “going on the SPREE,” starting
out with intent to have a frolic. _French_, ESPRIT. In the _Dutch_
language, SPREEUW is a jester.

~Springer-up~, a tailor who sells low-priced ready-made clothing, and
gives starvation wages to the poor men and women who “make up” for him.
The clothes are said to be SPRUNG-UP, or “blown together.”

~Sprint race~, a short-distance race, ran at the topmost speed
throughout. SPRINT is in the North synonymous with SPURT, and hence the
name.

~Sprung~, inebriated sufficiently to become boisterous.

~Spry~, active, strong, manly. Much used in America, but originally
English.

~Spuddy~, a seller of bad potatoes. In lower life, a SPUD is a raw
potato; and roasted SPUDS are those cooked in the cinders with their
skins on.

~Spun~, when a man has failed in his examination at Woolwich, he is said
to be SPUN; as at the Universities he is said to be “plucked” or
“ploughed.”

~Spunge~, a mean, paltry fellow, sometimes called a SPUNGER.

~Spunge~, to live at another’s expense in a mean and paltry manner.

~Spunging-house~, the sheriff’s officer’s house, where prisoners, when
arrested for debt, used to be taken. As extortionate charges were made
there for accommodation, the name was far from inappropriate.

~Spunk~, spirit, fire, courage, mettle, good humour.

    “In that snug room, where any man of SPUNK
    Would find it a hard matter to get drunk.”

        _Peter Pindar_, i. 245.

Common in America, and much used in some parts of Scotland.

~Spunk-fencer~, a lucifer-match seller.

~Spunks~, lucifer-matches.—_Herefordshire_; _Scotland_. SPUNK, says Urry,
in his MS. notes to Ray, “is the excrescency of some tree, of which they
make a sort of tinder to light their pipes with.”

~Spurt.~—_Old._ _See_ SPIRT.

~Squabby~, flat, short and thick. From SQUAB, a sofa.

~Square~, honest; “on the SQUARE,” _i.e._, fair and strictly honest; “to
turn SQUARE,” to reform, and get one’s living in an honest manner,—the
opposite of “cross.” The expression is, in all probability, derived from
the well-known masonic emblem the SQUARE, the symbol of evenness and
rectitude.

    “You must keep within the compass, and act upon the square with all
    mankind, for your masonry is but a dead letter if you do not
    habitually perform its reiterated injunctions.”—_Oliver’s Lectures
    on Signs and Symbols_, p. 190.

~Square~, “to be SQUARE with a man,” to be even with him, or to be
revenged; “to SQUARE up to a man,” to offer to fight him. Shakspeare
uses SQUARE in the sense of to quarrel.

~Square cove~, an honest man, as distinguished from “cross cove.”

~Square moll~, an honest woman, one who does not “batter.”

~Squaring his nibs~, giving a policeman, or any official, money for an
immoral or unlawful purpose. The term HIS NIBS has no reference to any
functionary, as the words mean simply “him,” and may be applied to any
one.

~Square rigged~, well dressed.—_Sea._

~Square up~, to settle, to pay a debt.

~Squarum~, a cobbler’s lapstone.

~Squash~, to crush; “to go SQUASH,” to collapse.

~Squeak~, an escape. Generally used with regard to the avoidance of
casualties. Among thieves, too, a prisoner acquitted after a hard trial
is said to have had “a narrow SQUEAK for it.”

~Squeak on a person~, to inform against, to peach.

~Squeal~, to inform, to peach. A North country variation of squeak;
SQUEALER, an informer, also an illegitimate baby.

~Squeeze~, silk; also, by a very significant figure, a thief’s term for
the neck.

~Squib~, a _jeu d’esprit_, which, like the firework of that
denomination, sparkles, bounces, stinks, and vanishes.—_Grose._
Generally used in reference to political and electioneering attacks of a
smart kind, which sting for a moment and are then forgotten.

~Squibs~, paint-brushes.

~Squiffy~, slightly inebriated.

~Squinny-eyed~, said of one given to squinting.—_Shakspeare._

~Squirt~, a doctor, or chemist.

~Squish~, common term among University men for marmalade.

~Stab~, “STAB yourself and pass the dagger,” help yourself and pass the
bottle.—_Theatrical Slang._

~Stab~, “on the STAB,” _i.e._, paid by regular weekly wages on the
“establishment,” of which word STAB is an abridgment.—_Printer’s term._

~Stab-rag~, a regimental tailor.—_Military Slang._

~Stag~, a shilling.

~Stag~, a term applied during the railway mania to a speculator without
capital, who took “scrip” in proposed lines, got the shares up to a
premium, and then sold out. Caricaturists represented the house of
Hudson, “the Railway King,” at Albert Gate, with a STAG on it, in
allusion to this term.

~Stag~, to see, discover, or watch,—like a STAG at gaze; “STAG the
push,” look at the crowd. Also, to dun, or demand payment; to beg.

~Stage-whisper~, one loud enough to be heard. From the stage “asides.”

~Stagger~, to surprise. “He quite STAGGERED me with the information.”

~Stagger~, one who looks out, or watches.

~Staggering-bob~, an animal to whom the knife only just anticipates
death from natural disease or accident,—said of meat on that account
unfit for human food. Also a newly-born calf.

~Stale drunk~, unevaporated fumes of liquor. A man is said to be STALE
DRUNK when he has been drunk overnight, and has doctored himself with
stimulants a little too much in the morning—when he has tried too many
of the “hairs of the dog that bit him.” If this state of things is long
continued, it is often called “same OLD DRUNK,” from a well-known nigger
story. The nigger was cautioned by his master for being too often drunk
within a given period, when the “cullud pusson” replied, “Same old
drunk, massa—same old drunk.”

~Stalking-horse~, originally a horse covered with loose trappings, under
which the mediæval sportsman concealed himself with his bow, so as to
approach his game unobserved. Subsequently a canvas figure, made light,
so as to be easily moved with one hand. Now used to represent any
bugbear persistently paraded; any constant and unpleasant reference to
the possible consequences of an act.

~Stall~, to lodge, or put up at a public-house. Also, to act a
part.—_Theatrical._

~Stall~, to frighten or discourage. In the days of dog-fighting and
pugilism, a dog or man who had originally shown great pluck would, after
a hard battle or two, show signs of cowardice. In such case he was said
to have been STALLED by his previous encounters. A STALL is a spurious
excuse or an imposition, a dodge, &c.

~Stall-off~, to put off by means of a device, to misdirect purposely.

~Stall off~, to blind, excuse, hide, to screen a robbery during the
perpetration of it by an accomplice.

~Stall your mug~, go away; spoken sharply by any one who wishes to get
rid of a troublesome or inconvenient person.

~Stallsman~, sometimes STALL, an accomplice.

~Stampers~, shoes.—_Ancient Cant._

~Stand~, “to STAND treat,” to pay for a friend’s entertainment; to bear
expense; to put up with treatment, good or ill, as, “Will you STAND
that?” a question often asked when a man has been struck or insulted.
Also in the sense of aggregate cost, as, “This house STOOD me in £1000;”
_i.e._, cost that sum; “to STAND pad,” to beg on the kerb with a small
piece of paper pinned on the breast, inscribed, “I am starving.”

~Stand in~, to make one of a party in a bet or other speculation; to
take a side in a dispute.

~Standing~, the position at a street corner, or on the kerb of a market
street, regularly occupied by a costermonger, or street seller.

~Standing patterers~, men who take a stand on the kerb of a public
thoroughfare, and deliver prepared speeches to effect a sale of any
articles they have to vend. _See_ PATTERER.

~Stangey~, a tailor, a person under petticoat government,—derived from
the custom of “riding the STANG,” mentioned in _Hudibras_:—

    “It is a custom used of course
    Where the grey mare is the better horse.”

~Star~, a common abbreviation of the name of the well-known STAR AND
GARTER Inn at Richmond. Clever people, who delight in altering names,
call this hostelry the “Gar and Starter.”

~Star it~, to perform as the centre of attraction, with inferior
subordinates to set off one’s abilities.—_Theatrical._

~Star the glaze~, to break a window. Among thieves it means to break the
window or show-glass of a jeweller or other tradesman, take any valuable
articles, and run away. Sometimes the glass is cut with a diamond, and a
strip of leather fastened to the piece of glass cut out to keep it from
falling in and making a noise. Another plan is to cut the sash.

~Starchy~, stuck-up, high-notioned, showily dressed, stiff and unbending
in demeanour.

~Stark-naked~, originally STRIP-ME-NAKED, _vide Randall’s Diary_, 1820,
raw gin.

~Start~, “the START,” London,—the great starting-point for beggars and
tramps. This is a term also used by many of superior station to those
mentioned.

~Start~, a proceeding of any kind; “a rum START,” an odd circumstance;
“to get the START of a person,” to anticipate or overreach him.

~Starvation~, though now a recognised word, was originally slang. Its
derivation is composite, and it was first introduced into the English
language by Mr. Dundas, in a debate in the House of Commons on American
affairs, in 1775. “I shall not,” he said, “wait for the advent of
STARVATION from Edinburgh to settle my judgment.” From this he was
always afterwards called STARVATION Dundas.—_Horace Walpole’s Letters._

~Starve’em~, ~Rob’em~, and ~Cheat’em~, the adjoining towns of Stroud,
Rochester, and Chatham are so designated by soldiers and sailors; from
some fancied peculiarities of the inhabitants.

~Stash~, to cease doing anything, to refrain, be quiet, leave off;
“STASH it, there, you sir!” _i.e._, be quiet, sir; to give over a lewd
or intemperate course of life is to STASH it.

~Stay~, to exhibit powers of endurance at walking, running, rowing, &c.

~Stayer~, one likely to persevere, one not easily discouraged. It is
usual for _laudatores temporis acti_ connected with the turf to deplore
the want of staying power which, according to their statements,
characterizes the modern British racehorse; while others, connected and
disconnected with sport, make similar remarks with reference to the
modern British man. So far, however, both descriptions of old gentlemen
have failed signally in endeavouring to make out a good case.

~Steam-engine~, potato-pie at Manchester is so termed.

~Steel~, the House of Correction in London, formerly named the Bastile,
but since shortened to STEEL. _See_ BASTILE.

~Steel-bar drivers~, or FLINGERS, journeymen tailors.

~Stems~, the legs.

~Step it~, to run away, or make off.

~Stepper~, the treadmill; the “everlasting staircase.”

~Stick~, a derogatory expression for a person; “a rum, or odd, STICK,” a
curious man. More generally a “poor STICK.”—_Provincial._

~Stick~, “cut your STICK,” be off, or go away; either simply equivalent
to a recommendation to prepare a walking staff in readiness for a
journey—in allusion to the Eastern custom of cutting a STICK before
setting out—or from the ancient mode of reckoning by notches or tallies
on a STICK. In Cornwall the peasantry tally sheaves of corn by cuts in a
STICK, reckoning by the score. “Cut your STICK” in this sense may mean
to make your mark and pass on—and so realize the meaning of the phrase,
“in the nick (or notch) of time.” Sir J. Emerson Tennent considers the
phrase equivalent to “cutting the connexion,” and suggests a possible
origin in the prophet’s breaking the staves of “Beauty” and
“Bands,”—_vide_ Zech. xi. 10, 14.

~Stick~, to cheat; “he got STUCK,” he was taken in; “I’m STUCK,” a
common phrase to express that the speaker has spent or lost all his
money, and can neither play nor pay any longer. STICK, to forget one’s
part in a performance.—_Theatrical._ STICK up, to place in an account;
“STICK it up to me,” _i.e._, give me credit for it; STICK on, to
overcharge or defraud; STICK up for, to defend a person, especially when
slandered in his absence; STICK up to, to persevere in courting or
attacking, whether in fisticuffs or argument; “to STICK in one’s
gizzard,” to rankle in one’s heart; “to STICK to a person,” to adhere to
one, to be his friend through adverse circumstances,—to “cotton” to
him; “to STICK one’s spoon in the wall,” to die.

~Stick-up~, to keep any one waiting at an appointed place or time. To
leave a friend or acquaintance to pay the whole or an undue share of a
tavern bill.

~Stick-ups~, or GILLS, shirt collars.

~Sticker~, one not likely to be easily shaken off, a stayer.

~Stickings~, coarse, bruised, or damaged meat sold to sausage-makers and
penny pie-shops.

~Sticks~, furniture, or household chattels; “pick up your STICKS and
cut!” summary advice to a person to take himself and furniture away.

~Sticky~, wax.

~Stiff~, paper, a bill of acceptance, &c.; “how did you get it, STIFF or
hard?” _i.e._, did he pay you cash or give a bill? “To do a bit of
STIFF,” to accept a bill. _See_ KITE.

~Stiff-fencer~, a street-seller of writing paper.

~Stiff un~, a corpse. Term used by undertakers.

~Stills~, undertakers’ slang term for STILL-BORN children. The fee paid
by nurses and others for their disposal is usually 2_s._ 6_d._ A
separate coffin is never given; the STILLS are quietly introduced into
one containing an adult about to be buried. STILLS are allowed to
accumulate at an undertaker’s until they sometimes number as many as a
dozen. Some little time back a very bulky coffin was opened, and found
to contain a large quantity of small corpses packed carefully round a
large corpse. This caused a little excitement, but nothing was done in
the matter.

~Stilton~, “that’s the STILTON,” or “it’s not the STILTON,” _i.e._, that
is quite the thing, or that is not quite the thing;—affected rendering
of “that is not the CHEESE,” which _see_.

~Stingo~, strong liquor.—_Yorkshire._

~Stink~, a disagreeable exposure. “To stir up a STINK” is to make a
disclosure which is generally unpleasant in its effect.

~Stinkomalee~, a name given to the then New London University by
Theodore Hook. Probably because some cow-houses and dunghills stood on
the original site. Some question about Trincomalee was agitated at the
same time. It is still applied by the students of the old Universities,
who regard it with disfavour from its admitting all denominations.

~Stipe~, a stipendiary magistrate.—_Provincial._

~Stir~, a prison, a lock-up; “in STIR,” in gaol. _Anglo-Saxon_, STYR,
correction, punishment.

~Stir-up Sunday~, the Sunday next before Advent, the collect for that
day commencing with the words, “Stir up.” Schoolboys, growing excited at
the prospect of the vacation, irreverently commemorate it by stirring
up—pushing and poking each other. “Crib-crust Monday” and “tug-button
Tuesday” are distinguished by similar tricks; while on “pay-off
Wednesday” they retaliate small grudges in a playful facetious way.
Forby says good housewives in Norfolk consider themselves reminded by
the name to mix the ingredients for their Christmas mince-pies.

~Stock.~ “To STOCK cards” is to arrange cards in a certain manner for
cheating purposes.

~Stock~, “to take STOCK of one,” to scrutinize narrowly one whom you
have reason to suspect, or one with whom you are likely to have business
transactions; taken from the tradesmen’s term for the annual examination
and valuation of their stock of goods.

~Stockdollager~, a heavy blow, a “finisher.” _Italian_, STOCCADO,
a fencing term. Also (in a general sense), a disastrous
event.—_Americanism._

~Stodge~, to surfeit, gorge, or clog with food. STODGE is in some places
bread and milk.

~Stoll~, to understand.—_North Country Cant._

~Stomach~, to bear with, to be partial to. Mostly used in a negative
character,—as, “I can’t STOMACH that.”

~Stone-jug~, a prison.

    “In a box of the stone-jug I was born.”

~Stook~, a pocket-handkerchief. A STOOK-HAULER, or “buzzer,” is a thief
who takes pocket-handkerchiefs.

~Story~, a falsehood,—the soft synonym for a lie, allowed in family
circles and boarding-schools. A Puritanism that came into fashion with
the tirade against romances, all novels and stories being considered as
dangerous and false.

~Stot~, a young bullock. In Northumberland the term STOT means to
rebound.

~Stotor~, a heavy blow, a settler.—_Old Cant._

~Stow~, to leave off, or have done; “STOW it, the gorger’s leary.” Leave
off, the person is looking. _See_ STASH, with which it is
synonymous.—_Ancient Cant._

~Stow~, to put away, to hide. A hungry man is said to STOW his food
rapidly. He is also said to hide it.

~Stow faking!~ leave off there, be quiet! FAKING means anything that may
be going on.

~Straight~, an American phrase peculiar to dram-drinkers; similar to our
word NEAT, which _see_.

~Strap~, a barber. From _Roderick Random_.

~Straw.~ Married ladies are said to be “in the STRAW” at their
accouchements. The phrase is a coarse metaphor, and has reference to
farmyard animals in a similar condition. It may have originally been
suggested to the inquiring mind by the Nativity.

~Strawing~, “selling” straws in the streets (generally for a penny), and
“giving” the purchaser a paper (indecent or political) or a gold (!)
ring,—neither of which, the patterer states, he is allowed by Act of
Parliament to sell.

~Streak~, to decamp, run away.—_Saxon._ In America the phrase is “to
make STREAKS,” or “make TRACKS.”

~Streaky~, irritated, ill-tempered. Said of a short-tempered man who has
his good and bad times in STREAK.

~Street-pitchers~, negro minstrels, ballad-singers, long-song men, men
“working a board” on which have been painted various exciting scenes in
some terrible drama, the details of which the STREET PITCHER is bawling
out, and selling in a little book or broadsheet (price one penny); or
any persons who make a stand—_i.e._, a pitch—in the streets, and sell
articles or contribute entertainments for a living.

~Stretch~, a walk.—_University._

~Stretch~, abbreviation of “STRETCH one’s neck,” to hang, to be executed
as a malefactor. As, “The night before Larry was STRETCHED.”

~Stretch~, twelve months,—generally used to intimate the time any one
has been sentenced by the judge or magistrate. One STRETCH is twelve
months’ imprisonment, two STRETCH is two years, three STRETCH is three
years, and so on.

~Stretcher~, a falsehood; one that requires a STRETCH of imagination or
comprehension.

~Stretcher~, a contrivance with handles, used by the police to carry off
persons who are violent or drunk.

~Stretcher-fencer~, one who sells braces.

~Stretching match~, an execution. Often called a “hanging match.”

~Strike a jigger~, to pick a lock, or break open a door.

~Strike me lucky!~ an expression used by the lower orders when making a
bargain, derived from the old custom of striking hands together, leaving
in that of the seller a LUCK PENNY as an earnest that the bargain is
concluded. In Ireland, at cattle markets, &c., a penny, or other small
coin, is always given by the buyer to the seller to ratify the
bargain.—_Hudibras._ Anciently this was called a “God’s penny.”

    “With that he cast him a God’s penny.”—_Heir of Linne._

The origin of the phrase being lost sight of, like that of many others,
it is often used as a modification of “Strike me blind!” and is now and
again corrupted into “Strike me silly!” A foolish variation of this is
“Strike me up a gum-tree!”

~Strills~, cheating lies.—_North Country Cant._

~String~, to hoax, to “get in a line.”

~Stroke~, the captain of a crew, the man who sets the pace, and is
generally the leading spirit in the boat. The coxswain usually looks
after University men when they are in training, so that they may not
fall into excesses, the STROKE having quite enough to do to attend to
his own training. Of late years University crews have placed themselves
under the guidance and tuition of “coaches,” generally ex-University men
of great ability and experience.

~Strommel~, straw.—_Ancient Cant._ Halliwell says that in Norfolk
STRUMMEL is a name for hair.

~Strong~, “to come it STRONG.” _See_ COME.

~Stuck~, moneyless. _See_ STICK.

~Stuck-up~, purse-proud—a form of snobbishness very common in those who
have risen in the world, especially among those who have risen rather
suddenly. Albert Smith wrote some amusing papers on the _Natural History
of STUCK-UP People_.

~Stuff~, money.

~Stuff~, to make false but plausible statements, to praise ironically,
to make game of a person,—literally, to STUFF or cram him with gammon
or falsehood.

~Stump~, to go on foot.

~Stump~, to go about speechmaking on politics or other subjects.
Originally an Americanism applied to the lowest class of candidates for
legislatorial honours, probably because they stood on a STUMP to address
their audiences. Maybe, also, because their utterances were short and
pithy. This latter reason would, however, hardly apply to our
representatives of the STUMP class, “the Leaguers,” who are, as a rule,
as long-winded as they are illogical.

~Stump up~, to give one’s share, to pay the reckoning, to bring forth
the money reluctantly.

~Stumped~, bowled out, done for, bankrupt, poverty-stricken. From the
cricketing term.

~Stumps~, legs, or feet.

~Stumpy~, money.

~Stun~, to astonish.

~Stunner~, a first-rate person or article.

~Stunners~, feelings of great astonishment; “it put the STUNNERS on me,”
_i.e._, it confounded me.

~Stunning~, first-rate, very good, really, astonishing. Costermongers
call anything extra good, STUNNING. Sometimes amplified to STUNNING JOE
BANKS! when the expression is supposed to be in its most intense form.
Joe Banks was a noted character in the last generation. He was the
proprietor of a public-house in Dyott Street, Seven Dials, and
afterwards, on the demolition of the Rookery, of another in Cranbourn
Alley. His houses became well-known from their being the resort of the
worst characters, while at the same time the strictest decorum was
always maintained in them. Joe Banks also acquired a remarkable
notoriety by acting as a medium betwixt thieves and their victims. Upon
the proper payment to Joe, a watch or a snuff-box would at any time be
restored to its lawful owner—“no questions in any case being asked.”
The most daring depredators in London placed the fullest confidence in
Joe, and it is believed (although the _Biographie Universelle_ is quiet
upon this point) that he never, in any instance, “sold” them. He was of
the middle height, stout, and strongly made, and was always noted for a
showy pin and a remarkably STUNNING neck-tie. It was this peculiarity in
the costume of Mr. Banks, coupled with those true and tried qualities as
a friend for which he was famous, that led his customers to proclaim him
as STUNNING JOE BANKS! The Marquis of Douro, Colonel Chatterley, and men
of their stamp, were accustomed to resort to a private-room at his
house, when too late (or too early) to gain admittance to the clubs or
more aristocratic establishments.

~Sub~, a subaltern officer in the army.

~Sub~, all.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Sub~, to draw money in advance; a term in use among workmen generally,
and those with casual employment in particular. Most likely from
subsidize.

~Sublime rascal~, a lawyer.

~Suck~, a parasite, a flatterer of the “nobs.”—_University._

~Suck~, to pump, or draw information from a person.

~Suck-casa~, a public-house.—_Lingua Franca._

~Suck the mop~, to be the victim of an omnibus nursing exploit. When an
omnibus is being nursed, the driver of the hindmost vehicle keeps so
close to his opponent that the horses get their heads almost into the
doorway. The nursed omnibus is then said to SUCK THE MOP. Nursing is,
thanks to tramways and the Metropolis Streets Act, almost a thing of the
past. At the East-end, however, it still goes merrily on.

~Suck the monkey~, to rob a cask of liquor by inserting a straw through
a gimlet-hole, and sucking a portion of the contents. Originally, as
Captain Marryatt states, to SUCK THE MONKEY, was to suck rum from
cocoa-nuts, which spirit had been inserted in place of the milk, for the
private use of the sailors. _See_ TAP THE ADMIRAL.

~Suck up~, “to SUCK UP to a person,” to insinuate oneself into his good
graces.

~Sudden death.~ In tossing, to be decided by the first call is to “GO
SUDDEN DEATH,” as distinguished from the longer forms of “best two out
of three,” and “first three.” At the Universities a crumpet, or Sally
Lunn, is so called.

~Sufferer~, a tailor; the loser at any game.

~Sugar~, money.

~Suicide~, four horses driven in a line. _See_ HARUM-SCARUM.

~Sulky~, a one-horse chaise, having only room for one person. Used
nowadays only in trotting matches.

~Sumsy~, an action of _assumpsit_.—_Legal Slang._

~Sun in the eyes~, too much drink. A person who is tipsy is said to have
the SUN IN HIS EYES. He is also said to have been “standing too long in
the SUN.”

~Supe~, or super, abbreviation of SUPERNUMERARY.—_Theatrical._

~Super~, a watch; SUPER-SCREWING, stealing watches.

~Surat~, an adulterated article of inferior quality. This word affords a
remarkable instance of the manner in which slang phrases are coined. In
the report of an action for libel in the _Times_, some few years back,
it was stated “that, since the American civil war, it has been not
unusual for manufacturers to mix American cotton with surat, and, the
latter being an inferior article, the people in Lancashire have begun to
apply the term SURAT to any article of inferior or adulterated quality.
The plaintiffs were brewers, and the action was brought to recover
special damages resulting from the publication of an advertisement in
these words:—‘All in want of beerhouses must beware of Beaumont and
White, the SURAT brewers.’”

~Surf~, an actor who frequently pursues another calling.—_Theatrical._
SURF, or SERF, is also a term much in use among the lower orders to
denote a crawling or sycophantic wretch.

~Suspicion~, a scarcely perceptible flavour; as, “There was just a
SUSPICION of oil in the mixture.” _French_, SOUPÇON.

~Swab~, an epaulet.—_Sea._

~Swack-up~, a falsehood.

~Swaddler~, a Wesleyan Methodist; a name originally given to members of
that body by the Irish mob; said to have originated with an ignorant
Romanist, to whom the words of the English Bible were a novelty, and
who, hearing one of John Wesley’s preachers mention the swaddling
clothes of the Holy Infant, in a sermon on Christmas-day at Dublin,
shouted out in derision, “A SWADDLER! a SWADDLER!” as if the whole story
were the preacher’s invention.—_Southey’s Life of Wesley_, vol. ii. p.
109. _See_ introductory article.

~Swaddler~, _see_ SOUPER.

~Swaddy~, or COOLIE, a soldier. The former was originally applied to a
discharged soldier, and perhaps came from SHODDY, which is made from
soldiers’ and policemen’s worn-out coats. The term was one of
opprobrium, and was probably the result of a long peace, for it became
obsolete as soon as the Crimean War commenced.

~Swag~, a lot or plenty of anything, a portion or division of property.
In Australia the term is used for the luggage carried by diggers.
_Scotch_, SWEG, or SWACK; _German_, SWEIG, a flock. Old cant for a shop.

~Swag-shop~, a warehouse where “Brummagem” and general wares, fancy
trinkets, plated goods, &c., are sold. Jews are the general proprietors;
and the goods are very low-priced, trashy, and showy. SWAG-SHOPS were
formerly plunder depôts.—_Old Cant._

~Swagsman~, one who carries the booty after a burglary.

~Swank~, to boast or “gas” unduly.

~Swankey~, cheap or small beer. Any weak fermented beverage.

~Swap~, to exchange. Grose says it is Irish cant, but the term is now
included in most dictionaries as an allowed vulgarism.

~Swarry~, a boiled leg of mutton and trimmings. Sam Weller’s adventure
with the Bath footmen originated the term. _See_ TRIMMINGS.

~Swatchel-cove~, the master of a Punch-and-Judy exhibition who “fakes
the slum,” and does the necessary squeak for the amusement of the
bystanders. _See_ SCHWASSLE BOX. The orthography of many of these
colloquial expressions differs. It was thought best to give the various
renderings as collected.

~Sweat~, to extract money from a person, to “bleed.” Also, to squander
riches.—_Bulwer._

~Sweat~, to violently shake up a lot of guineas or sovereigns in a
leathern bag for the purpose of benefiting by the perspiration.

~Sweater~, common term for a “cutting” or “grinding” employer,—one who
SWEATS his workpeople. A cheap tailor, who pays starvation wages.

~Sweep~, a contemptuous term for a low or shabby man.

~Sweet~, loving or fond; “how SWEET he was upon the moll,” _i.e._, what
marked attention he paid the girl.

~Sweetener~, a person who runs up the prices of articles at an auction.
_See_ JOLLYING, BONNET, &c.

~Swell~, a man of importance; a person with a showy, jaunty exterior, “a
rank SWELL,” a very flashily dressed person, a man who by excessive
dress apes a higher position than he actually occupies. Any one
occupying a superior position in society is by the mob called a SWELL.
Anything is said to be SWELL or SWELLISH that looks showy, or is many
coloured, or is of a desirable quality. Dickens and Thackeray were
termed great SWELLS in literature, and so are the first persons in the
learned professions SWELLS in their way.

~Swell hung in chains~, said of a showy man in the habit of wearing much
jewellery.

~Swell street~, the West-end of London.

~Swig~, a hearty drink.

~Swig~, to drink. _Saxon_, SWIGAN.

~Swill~, to drink inordinately. SWILL, hog-wash. From which the verb has
possibly been derived.—_Norfolk._

~Swim~, “a good SWIM,” a good run of luck, a long time out of the
policeman’s clutches.—_Thieves’ term._ Among anglers “a good SWIM” is a
good pitch for a part where fish are plentiful—that is, because a lot
of fish keeping together are called a SWIM. Thus one who is in luck, is
well connected, or is doing a good business, is said to be in a good
SWIM.

~Swindler~, although a recognised word in standard dictionaries,
commenced service as a slang term. It was used as such by the poor
Londoners against the German Jews who set up in London about the year
1762, also by our soldiers in the German war about that time.
SCHWINDELN, in _German_, signifies to cheat.

~Swing.~ To have one’s SWING is to have a full turn at anything.

~Swing~, to be hanged; “if you don’t do what’s right, I’ll SWING for
you,” _i.e._, take your life,—a common threat in low neighbourhoods.

~Swingeing~, large, huge, powerful. As a SWINGEING blow, SWINGEING
damages, &c.

~Swipe~, at cricket, to hit hard with a full swing of the bat. Most
probably a condensation of “wipe swingeing” or “swinging wipe.”

~Swipes~, sour or small beer. SWIPE, to drink.—_Sea._

~Swipey~ (from SWIPES), intoxicated.

~Swish~, to flog, derived perhaps from the sound. Maybe, a corruption of
SWITCH.

~Swished~, or SWITCHED, married.

~Swivel-eye~, a squinting eye.

~Swizzle~, small beer, drink.

~Swot~, mathematics; also, a mathematician; as a verb, to work hard for
an examination, to be diligent in one’s studies.—_Army._

This word originated at the great slang manufactory for the army, the
Royal Military College, Sandhurst, in the broad Scotch pronunciation by
Dr. Wallace, one of the Professors, of the word sweat. It has since
become fashionable at the Universities.

~Syce~, a groom.—_Anglo-Indian._

~T~, “to suit to a T,” to fit to a nicety.—_Old._ Perhaps from the
T-square of carpenters, by which the accuracy of work is tested.

~Tabby party~, a party consisting entirely of women, a tea and tattle
gathering. In America, a gathering of men only is called a “stag party.”

~Tabooed~, forbidden. This word, now very common, is derived from a
custom of the South-Sea islanders, first noticed in _Cook’s Voyages_.

~Tack~, a taste foreign to what was intended; a barrel may get a TACK
upon it, either permanently mouldy, sour, or otherwise.

~Tacked~, tied down. When a man has another vanquished, or for certain
reasons bound to his service, he is said to have “got him TACKED.”

~Tackle~, clothes.—_Sea._ Also to encounter a person in argument.

~Taffy~ (corruption of David), a Welshman. Compare Sawney (from
Alexander), a Scotchman; Paddy (from Patrick), an Irishman; and Johnny
(from John Bull), an Englishman.

~Tag-rag-and-bobtail~, a mixed crowd of low people, the lower orders
generally.

~Tail-block~, a watch.—_Sea._

~Tail-buzzer~, a thief who picks coat-pockets.

~Tail-down~, “to get the TAIL DOWN,” generally means to lose courage.
When a professional at any game loses heart in a match he is said to get
his TAIL DOWN. “His TAIL was quite DOWN, and it was all over.” The
origin is obvious.

~Take~, to succeed, or be patronized. “Do you think the new opera will
TAKE?” “No, because the same company TOOK so badly under the old
management.” “To TAKE on,” to grieve; Shakspeare uses the word TAKING in
this sense. To “TAKE up for any one,” to protect or defend a person; “to
TAKE off,” to mimic; “to TAKE heart,” to have courage; “to TAKE down a
peg or two,” to humiliate, or tame; “to TAKE up,” to reprove; “to TAKE
after,” to resemble; “to TAKE in,” to cheat or defraud, probably from
the lower class lodging-house-keepers’ advertisements, “Single men TAKEN
in and done for,”—an engagement which is as frequently performed in a
bad as a good sense; in reference to this performance, Scripture is
often quoted: “I was a stranger and ye TOOK me in.” “To TAKE the field,”
when said of a general, to commence operations against the enemy. When a
racing man TAKES the field he stakes his money against the favourite,
that is, he takes the chances of the field against the chance of one
horse.

~Take beef~, to run away.

~Take in~, a cheating or swindling transaction,—sometimes termed “a
dead TAKE IN.” Shakspeare has TAKE IN in the sense of conquering. To be
“had,” or to be “spoken to,” were formerly synonymous phrases with to be
TAKEN IN.

~Take it out~, to obtain value for money, labour, &c. A rich man is said
to “TAKE IT (_i.e._, his money) OUT in fine footmen, fine feeding,” &c.
A poor man “TAKES IT (_i.e._, his trouble) OUT in drink.”

~Talking~, a stable term, of a milder kind, applied to those horses
which are addicted to ROARING. _See_ the latter expression.

~Talk shop~, to intrude oneself or one’s private business too freely
into conversation. Any one who does this is said to be shoppy.

~Tall~, extensive, exaggerated,—generally applied to conversation, as
“loud” is to dress, or personal appearance; “TALL talk that,” _i.e._,
conversation too boastful or high-flown to be true. Among pedestrians a
great rate of speed is spoken of as TALL.

~Tally~, five dozen bunches of turnips.—_Costermongers’ term._

~Tally~, “to live TALLY,” to live in a state of unmarried impropriety;
TALLY-WIFE, a woman who cohabits with a man to whom she is not married.

~Tallyman~, an accommodating salesman who takes payment by instalments
to suit the convenience of the purchaser, but who is anything but
accommodating when payments are irregular. TALLYMEN are the cause of
much misfortune to the working classes, from their high and exorbitant
rates, and the temptations they offer to weak-minded women, who purchase
in haste and repent at leisure.

~Tan~, to beat or thrash; “I’ll TAN your hide,” _i.e._, I’ll give you a
good beating.

~Tan~, an order to pull.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Tanner~, a sixpence. Perhaps _Gipsy_, TAWNO, little, or _Latin_, TENER,
slender.

~Tanny~, or TEENY, little. _Gipsy_, TAWNO, little.

~Tantrems~, pranks, capers, frolicking; from the _Tarantula_ dance.
_See_ account of the involuntary frenzy and motions caused by the bite
of the tarantula in Italy.—_Penny Cyclopædia._

~Tantrums~, ill-tempers. “He’s in his TANTRUMS this morning,” is often
said of a peevish, querulous man. They are not peculiar to the one sex,
however.

~Tap the Admiral~, to suck liquor from a cask by means of a straw, said
to have been done with the rum-cask in which Lord Nelson’s body was
brought to England, to such an extent as to leave the gallant Admiral
dry.

~Tap-tub~, the _Morning Advertiser_,—so called by vulgar people from
the fact that this daily newspaper is the principal organ of the London
brewers and publicans. Sometimes termed the _Gin and Gospel Gazette_,
though this title is fast fading out since the paper has been in the
hands of its present editor.

~Tape~, gin,—term with female servants. Also, a military term used in
barracks when no spirits are allowed. _See_ RIBBON.

~Taper~, to give over gradually, to run short.

~Taradiddle~, a falsehood.

~Tar-brush~, a person whose complexion indicates a mixture of negro
blood, is said to have had a lick of the TAR-BRUSH. Sometimes a man of
this description is said to have been dipped in the black-pot, and he is
often reminded that “another dip would have done it,” _i.e._, another
dip would have made a negro of him.

~Tar-out~, to punish, to serve out.

~Tarpaulin~, a sailor.

~Tartar~, a savage fellow, an “ugly customer.” To “catch a TARTAR,” is
to discover somewhat unpleasantly that a person is by no means so mild
or good-tempered as he or she at first appeared.

~Tat-box~, a dice-box.

~Tater~, “s’elp my TATER,” an evasion of a profane oath, sometimes
varied by “s’elp my greens.”

~Tatler~, a watch; “nimming a TATLER,” stealing a watch.

~Tats~, dice.

~Tats~, old rags; milky TATS, white rags.

~Tatterdemalion~, a ragged fellow.

~Tatting~, gathering old rags.

~Tattoo~, a pony.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Taw~, a large or principal marble; “I’ll be one on your TAW,” I will
pay you out, or be even with you,—a simile taken from boys aiming
always at winning the TAW when playing at marbles.

~Tea-fight~, an evening party, alias a “muffin-worry.”

~Tea-spoon~, five thousand pounds. _See_ SPOONS.

~Teagueland~, Ireland. From the national character of the name TEAGUE.

~Teeth~, “he has cut his eye TEETH,” _i.e._, is old and ’cute enough.

~Teeth-drawing~, wrenching off knockers. Medical students’ term.

~Teddy Hall~, St. Edmund Hall.—_Oxford University._

~Teetotaller~, a total abstainer from alcoholic drinks. The origin of
this term is not known. It is said to be from the expression of a
fanatical and stuttering enthusiast in the cause of total abstinence. It
has nothing to do with tea.

~Teetotally~, amplification of TOTALLY.

~Te-he~, to titter, “Upon this I TE-HE’D.”—_Madame d’Arblay._ As an
interjection it is as old as Chaucer. _See Miller’s Tale_:—

    “TE-HE, quod she, and clapt the window to.”

~Tell on~, to tell about, to talk of, to inform against. (This is formed
by a simple misuse of the preposition.)

~Ten commandments~, a virago’s fingers, or nails. Often heard in a
female street disturbance. “I’ll leave the TEN COMMANDMENTS marked on
his chump,” shows that the term may be applied to either the fingers or
the scratchings. It would be a strange hand, however, that, with the
best opportunity, could made five marks simultaneously.

~Tench~, the Penitentiary, of which it is a contraction. _See_ STEEL.

~Tenpence to the shilling~, a vulgar phrase denoting a deficiency in
intellect.

~Testamur~, the slip of paper on which the examiners testify
(testari) to the fact that the candidate has satisfied their
requirements.—_University._

~Tester~, sixpence. From TESTONE, a shilling in the reign of Henry
VIII., but a sixpence in the time of Queen Elizabeth.—_Shakspeare._
_French_, TESTE, or TÊTE, the head of the monarch on the coin.

~Teviss~, a shilling. Costermongers’ and tramps’ term.

~Thatch~, the human hair. “He’s well THATCHED,” is said of a man with a
good head of hair.

~The Tavern~, New Inn Hall.—_Oxford University._

~The thing~, the style, the proper proportion. Application varied. A
good appearance, a decent dinner, or a fair bottle of wine, is said to
be “the THING,” sometimes “the correct THING.”

~Thick~, intimate, familiar. The Scotch use the word “chief” in this
sense, as, “the two are very chief now.”

~Thick;~ “to lay it on THICK,” to flatter unduly, to surfeit with praise
or adulation.

~Thick un~, a sovereign; originally a crown piece, or five shillings.

~Thimble~, or YACK, a watch.—_Prison Cant._

~Thimble-rig~, a noted cheating game some years back, played at fairs
and places of great public thronging, consisting of two or three
thimbles rapidly and dexterously placed over a pea. The THIMBLE-RIGGER,
suddenly ceasing, asks under which thimble the pea is to be found. Any
one not a practised hand would lose nine times out of ten any bet he
might happen to make with him. The pea is generally concealed under his
nail. THIMBLE-RIGGING has of late years given way to “broad-working.”

~Thimble-twisters~, thieves who rob persons of their watches.

~Thingumy~, THINGUMBOB, expressions used for the name of a thing which
cannot be recollected at the instant.

~Thin-skinned~, over-nice, petulant, apt to get a “raw.” _See_ that
term.

~Three-cornered scraper~, a cocked hat.—_Sea._

~Three sheets in the wind~, unsteady from drink.—_Sea._

~Three-up~, a gambling game played by costers and others of like grade.
Three halfpennies are thrown up by one man to the call of another. If
they do not come all alike, the cry is void, and the calling and tossing
are resumed. When the three coins are all alike they are said to “come
off,” and then all bets are decided according to the success or failure
of the caller. When two men toss, they play “up for up,” _i.e._, they
toss and cry alternately. When three or more join in, the gathering is
named a school, and one man, who is called a pieman, cries to the
halfpence of the others until he loses, when the winner of the toss
becomes pieman in turn.

~Through~, finished. In America, where this word is most used in the
sense now given, a guest who has had enough will, when asked to take
more, say, “I’m THROUGH,” which is certainly preferable to the other
Americanism, “crammed.”

~Thrummer~, a threepenny bit.

~Thrums~, threepence. Also, in Coventry, remnants and waste pieces of
silk.

~Thrups~, threepence. _See_ the preceding, which is more general.

~Thud~, the dull, dead sound made by the fall of a heavy body, or the
striking of a bullet against any soft, fleshy substance.

~Thumper~, a magnificently constructed lie, a lie about which there is
no stint of imaginative power.

~Thumping~, large, fine, or strong.

~Thunderbomb~, an imaginary ship of vast size. _See_ MERRY DUN OF DOVER.

~Thunderer~, the _Times_ newspaper, sometimes termed “the THUNDERER of
Printing House Square,” from the locality where it is printed.

~Thundering~, large, extra-sized.

~Tibbing out~, going out of bounds.—_Charterhouse._

~Tibby~, the head. Street slang, with no known etymology. To drop on
one’s TIBBY is to frighten or startle any one, to take one unawares.

~Tib’s eve~, “neither before Christmas nor after,” an indefinite period;
like the Greek Kalends, TIB’S EVE has a future application; an
indefinite period of past time is sometimes said to be “when Adam was an
oakum-boy in Chatham Dockyard.” “The reign of Queen Dick” is another
form of this kind of expression, and is used to indicate either past
time or future.

~Tick~, credit, trust. Johnson says it is a corruption of
“ticket,”—tradesmen’s bills being formerly written on tickets or cards.
On TICK, therefore, is equivalent to on TICKET, or on trust. In use in
1668, and before, as follows:—

    “No matter upon landing whether you have money or no—you may swim
    in twentie of their boats over the river upon TICKET.”—_Decker’s
    Gulls’ Hornbook_, 1609.

~Ticker~, a watch. Formerly cant, now street slang.

~Ticket~, “that’s the TICKET,” _i.e._, that’s what is wanted, or what is
best. Probable corruption of “that’s _etiquette_,” or, perhaps, from
TICKET, a bill or invoice. This phrase is sometimes extended into
“that’s the TICKET for soup,” in allusion to the card given to beggars
for immediate relief at soup kitchens. _See_ TICK.

~Tickle~, to puzzle; “a reg’lar TICKLER” is a poser.

~Tiddlywink~, slim, puny; sometimes TILLYWINK.

~Tidy~, tolerably, or pretty well; “How did you get on to-day?”—“Oh,
TIDY.”—_Saxon._

~Tie~, a dead heat. A game of any kind, in which the possibility exists,
is said to end in a tie, if the markings are level on each side at the
finish. In racing parlance, all level finishes are called dead-heats.

~Tied up~, given over, finished; also married, in allusion to the
hymeneal knot, unless a jocose allusion be intended to the “halter”
(altar). _See_ BUCKLED, term in use among costermongers and street folk
generally.

~Tiff~, a pet, a fit of ill humour.

~Tiffin~, a breakfast, _déjeûner à la fourchette_.—_Anglo-Indian
Slang._

~Tiffy~, easily offended, apt to be annoyed.

~Tiger~, a parasite; also a term for a ferocious woman; a boy employed
to wait on gentlemen—one who waits on ladies is a page.

~Tiger~, a superlative yell. “Three cheers, and the last in
TIGERS.”—_American._ To “fight the TIGER” is also American, and refers
to gambling with professionals—dangerous pastime.

~Tight~, close, stingy; hard up, short of cash; TIGHT, spruce, strong,
active; “a TIGHT lad,” a smart, active young fellow; TIGHT, drunk, or
nearly so, generally the result of “going on the loose;” “TIGHT-laced,”
puritanical, over-precise. Money is said to be TIGHT when the public,
from want of confidence in the aspect of affairs, are not inclined to
speculate.

~Tightener~, a dinner, or hearty meal. _See_ SPITALFIELDS’ BREAKFAST.

~Tike-~, or BUFFER-LURKING, dog-stealing.

~Tile~, a hat, a covering for the head.

    “I’m a gent, I’m a gent,
      In the Regent-Street style,—
    Examine my costume,
      And look at my TILE.”—_Popular Song._

Sometimes used in another sense, “having a TILE loose,” _i.e._, being
slightly crazy. _See_ PANTILE.

~Timber merchant~, or SPUNK FENCER, a lucifer-match seller.

~Timber-toes~, a wooden-legged man. Also at the East-end one who wears
clogs, _i.e._, wooden soled boots.

~Time~, cabman’s slang for money. If they wish to express 9s. 9d. they
say that “it is a quarter to ten;” if 3s. 6d., half-past three; if 11s.
9d. a quarter to twelve. Cab-drivers can hardly have originated a system
which has been in existence as long as the adage, “Time is money.” They
have, however, the full use of the arrangement, which is perhaps the
simplest on record.

~Time~, TO DO, to work out a sentence of imprisonment. Time is the
generic term for all quantities of incarceration, whether short or long.
Sometimes stir-time (imprisonment in the House of Correction) is
distinguished from the more extended system of punishment which is
called “pinnel (penal) time.”

~Time o’ day~, a dodge, the latest aspect of affairs; “that’s your TIME
O’ DAY,” _i.e._, that’s well done; to put a person up to the TIME O’
DAY, or let him know “what’s o’clock,” is to instruct him in the
knowledge needful for him.

~Tin~, money,—generally applied to silver.

~Tinge~, the per-centage allowed by drapers and clothiers to their
assistants upon the sale of old-fashioned articles. _See_ SPIFFS.

~Tinkler~, a bell. “Jerk the TINKLER,” ring the bell. Refined or
affected slangists sometimes say, “Agitate the communicator,” which,
though it represents “ring the bell,” should more properly mean “pull
the cord.”

~Tin-pot~, “he plays a TIN-POT game,” _i.e._, a low, mean, or shabby
game. In the _Contes d’Eutrapel_, a French officer at the siege of
Chatillon is ridiculously spoken of as Captain TIN-POT—_Capitaine du
Pot d’Etain_. TIN-POT, as generally used, means worthless. As applied to
billiards and kindred games, it means pretentious and inferior play.

~Tip~, advice or information respecting anything, but mostly used in
reference to horse-racing, so that the person TIPPED may know how to bet
to the best advantage. The “straight TIP” is the TIP which comes direct
from the owner or trainer of a horse. Of late years a “straight TIP”
means a direct hint on any subject.

~Tip~, a douceur; “that’s the TIP,” _i.e._, that’s the proper thing to
do. “To miss one’s TIP,” to fail in a scheme.—_Old Cant._

~Tip~, to give, lend, or hand over anything to another person; “come,
TIP up the tin,” _i.e._, hand up the money; “TIP the wink,” to inform by
winking; “TIP us your fin,” _i.e._, give me your hand; “TIP one’s boom
off,” to make off, or depart. From the seafaring phrase.

~Tip the double~, to “bolt,” or run away from any one.

~Tip-top~, first-rate, of the best kind.

~Tip-topper~, a “swell,” or dressy man, a “Gorger.”

~Tipper~, a kind of ale brewed at Brighton. Mrs. Gamp preferred the
“Brighton TIPPER.”

~Tipster~, a “turf” agent who collects early and generally special
information of the condition and racing capabilities of horses in the
training districts, and posts the same to his subscribers to guide their
betting.

    “The racing TIPSTERS have much less patronage than formerly, before
    “Geoffry Greenhorn” laid a trap for them, and published the tips he
    received in _The Life_. Professor Ingledue, M.A., the mesmerist, is
    silent; and if their subscribers, ‘for whose interests I have
    collected my old and able staff, with many additional ones, who are
    already at work in the training districts,’ could only get a sight
    of the ‘old and able staff,’ they would find it consisting of a man
    and a boy, at work in the back room of a London public-house, and
    sending different winners for every race to their
    subscribers.”—_Post and Paddock_, by the “Druid.”

There are, however, whatever non-racing men may think, many “touts”
whose information is valuable to even the “best informed” writers.

~Tit~, a favourite name for a horse.

    “They scorned the coach, they scorned the rails,
    Two spanking tits with streaming tails,
    Them swiftly onward drew.”—_End of All Things._

~Tit for tat~, an equivalent.

~Titivate~, to put in order, or dress up. Originally TIDY-VATE.

~Titley~, drink, generally applied to intoxicating beverages.

~Titter~, a girl; “nark the TITTER,” _i.e._, look at the girl.—_Tramp’s
term._

~Tizzy~, a sixpence. Corruption of TESTER.

~Toad-in-the-hole~, a kind of pudding, consisting of small pieces of
meat immersed in batter, and baked. Also, a term applied to
perambulating advertising mediums. _See_ SANDWICH.

~Toasting-fork~, a regulation sword, indicative of the general
uselessness of that weapon.

~Toby~, the road. The highwayman or swell robber was in old days said to
be on the high TOBY, from the high or main road, while those meaner
fellows, the footpad and the cutpurse, were but “low TOBY-MEN,” from
their frequenting the by-ways.

~To-do~ (pronounced quickly, and as one word), a disturbance, trouble;
“here’s a pretty TO-DO,” here is an unpleasant difficulty. This exactly
tallies with the _French_, AFFAIRE (_à faire_).—_See Forby’s Vocabulary
of East Anglia_.

~To the nines~, to the dodges of the day. “He’s up to the NINES,” means
he’s up to everything. “Dressed to the NINES,” means dressed loudly, or,
as it is more generally known now, “dressed to death.”

~Toddle~, to walk as a child.

~Toe~, to kick. “I’ll TOE your backside.” Common in London.

~Toff~, a dandy, a swell of rank. Corruption probably of TUFT. _See_
TOFT.

~Toffer~, a well-dressed “gay” woman. One who deals with TOFFS.

~Tofficky~, dressy, showy.

~Toft~, a showy individual, a swell, a person who, in a Yorkshireman’s
vocabulary, would be termed “uppish.” _See_ TUFT.

~Tog~, a coat. _Latin_, TOGA.—_Ancient Cant._

~Tog~, to dress, or equip with an outfit; “TOGGED out to the nines,”
dressed in the first style.

~Toggery~, clothes, harness, domestic paraphernalia of any kind.

~Togs~, clothes; “Sunday TOGS,” best clothes. One of the oldest cant
words—in use in the time of Henry VIII. _See_ CANT.

~Toke~, dry bread. Sometimes used to denote a lump of anything.

~Toko for yam~, a Roland for an Oliver. Possibly from a system of barter
carried on between sailors and aborigines.

~Tol-lol~, or TOL-LOLLISH, tolerable, or tolerably.

~Toll-shop~, a Yorkshire correspondent gives this word as denoting in
that county a prison, and also the following verse of a song, popular at
fairs in the East Riding:—

    “But if ivver he get out agean,
    And can but raise a frind,
    Oh! the divel may tak’ TOLL-SHOP,
    At Beverley town-end!”

This is but a variation of the Scottish TOLBOOTH.

~Tom~, _e.g._, “after TOM,” after the hour at which Big TOM of
Christchurch rings. At its last stroke the gates are closed, and
undergrads entering after have to pay an increasing sum for each hour up
to twelve. To be out after that involves an interview with the
Master.—_Oxford University._

~Tom and Jerry shop~, a low drinking shop. Probably some allusion to
Pierce Egan’s famous characters in his _Life in London_. Generally
contracted to JERRY SHOP.

~Tom Toppers~, a waterman, from a popular song, entitled, _Overboard he
vent_.

~Tom Tug~, a waterman. From the small stage-play. Also rhyming slang for
a flat, or rather a “mug.”

~Tomboy~, a hoyden, a rude romping girl.

~Tombstone~, a pawn-ticket—“In memory of” whatever has been pawned,—a
well-known slang expression with those Londoners who are in the habit of
following “my uncle.”

~Tomfoolery~, nonsense; trashy, mild, and innocuous literature.

~Tom-fool’s colours~, scarlet and yellow, the ancient motley.
Occasionally, as a rhyme of quality suitable to the subject,

    “Red and yellow,
    TOM FOOL’S colour.”

A proposition is said to be TOM FOOL when it is too ridiculous to be
entertained or discussed.

~Tom-tom~, a street instrument, a kind of small drum beaten with the
fingers, somewhat like the ancient tabor; a performer on this
instrument. “Hark! ’tis the Indian drum.”

~Tommy~, _See_ DICKEY.

~Tommy~, bread,—food generally. Sometimes applied by workmen to the
supply of food which they carry in a bag or handkerchief as their daily
allowance. TOMMY-BAG is the term for the bag or handkerchief in which
the “daily bread” is carried.

~Tommy~, truck, barter, the exchange of labour for goods, not money.
Both term and practice, general among English operatives for
half-a-century, are by a current fiction supposed to have been abolished
by Act of Parliament.

~Tommy Dodd~, in tossing when the odd man either wins or loses, as per
agreement. A phrase in frequent use in London. A music-hall song has
been given with this title and on this subject.

~Tommy-master~, one who pays his workmen in goods, or gives them tickets
upon tradesmen, with whom he shares the profit.

~Tommy-shop~, a shop where wages are paid to mechanics or others, who
are expected to “take out” a portion of the money in goods. Also, a
baker’s shop.

~Tongue~, “to TONGUE a person,” _i.e._, to talk him down. TONGUED,
talkative.

~Tony Lumpkin~, a young, clownish country fellow. From _She Stoops to
Conquer_.

~Tool~, as “a poor TOOL,” a bad hand at anything.

~Tool~, to drive a coach, or any other vehicle. To “handle the ribbons”
in fine style.

~Tool~, a very little boy employed by burglars to enter at small
apertures, and open doors for the larger thieves outside.

~Tooler~, a pickpocket. MOLL-TOOLER, a female pickpocket.

~Tooley Street tailor~, a self-conceited, vainglorious man. The “three
tailors of Tooley Street” are said to have immortalized themselves by
preparing a petition for Parliament—and some say, presenting it—with
only their own signatures thereto, which commenced, “We, the people of
England.”

~Tooth~, “he has cut his eye TOOTH,” _i.e._, he is sharp enough, or old
enough, to do so; “old in the TOOTH,” far advanced in age,—said often
of old maids. From the stable term for aged horses which have lost the
distinguishing marks in their teeth.

~Tootsies~, feet, those of ladies and children in particular. In married
life it is said the husband uses this expression for the first six
months; after that he terms them “hoofs.”

~Top~, the signal among tailors and sempstresses for snuffing the
candle; one cries TOP, and all the others follow; he who last pronounces
the word has to snuff the candle.

~Top-dressing~, in journalism, is the large-type introduction to a
report, generally written by a man of higher literary attainments than
the ordinary reporter who follows with the details.

~Top-heavy~, drunk.

~Top-sawyer~, the principal of a party, or profession. “A TOP-SAWYER
signifies a man that is a master-genius in any profession. It is a piece
of Norfolk slang, and took its rise from Norfolk being a great timber
county, where the TOP SAWYERS get double the wages of those beneath
them.”—_Randall’s Diary_, 1820.

~Top up~, a finishing drink. “He drank two bottles of claret and one of
port, which he TOPPED UP with half a bottle of brandy.”

~Topped~, hanged, or executed.

~Topper~, anything or person above the ordinary; a blow on the head.
“Give him a TOPPER and chance it,” “Let him have a TOPPER for luck.”

~Topper~, the tobacco which is left in the bottom of a pipe-bowl—_lucus
a non lucendo_; or the stump of a smoked cigar. TOPPER-HUNTERS are men
who pick up cigar ends and odd pieces of stale tobacco, which they mix
and chop up for home consumption or sale.

~Topsy-turvy~, the bottom upwards. Grose gives an ingenious etymology of
this once cant term, viz., “top-side turf-ways,”—turf being always laid
the wrong side upwards. This is so far ingenious that it creates a fact
for the purpose of arguing from it. Turfs are laid with the grass part
together during carriage; so, anyhow, the definition could be only half
right. In fact, TOPSY-TURVY is but short for “top-side t’other way.”

~To-rights~, excellent, very well, or good.—_Low London slang._

~Tormentors~, the large iron flesh-forks used by cooks at sea.

~Torpids~, the second-class race-boats at Oxford, answering to the
Cambridge “sloggers.”

~Toshers~, men who steal copper from ships’ bottoms in the Thames.

~Toss~, a measure of sprats.—_Billingsgate._

~Tot~, a small glass; a “TOT o’ whisky” is the smallest quantity sold.

~Tot-up~, to add together,—as columns of figures, £ _s._ _d._ From
TOTAL-UP, through the vulgarism TOTTLE.

~Totting~, bone-picking, either peripatetically or at the dust-heaps.
“TOT” is a bone, but chiffoniers and cinder-hunters generally are called
TOT-PICKERS nowadays. TOTTING also has its votaries on the banks of the
Thames, where all kinds of flotsam and jetsam, from coals to carrion,
are known as TOTS.

~Touch~, a slang expression in common use in phrases which express the
extent to which a person is interested or affected, “as a fourpenny
TOUCH,” _i.e._, a thing costing fourpence. _See_ an example in Mr.,
afterwards Sir Erasmus, Philipps’s Diary, at Oxford, in 1720. “_Sept.
22._—At night went to the ball at the Angel, a guinea TOUCH.” It is also
used at Eton in the sense of a “tip,” or present of money; and is
sometimes said of a woman to imply her worthlessness, as, “Only a
half-crown TOUCH.”

~Touch-and-go~, an expression often applied to men with whom business
arrangements should be of the lightest possible character. Thus, “He’s a
TOUCH-AND-GO sort of fellow. Be careful of him.”

~Toucher~, “as near as a TOUCHER,” as near as possible without actually
touching.—_Coaching term._ The old Jarveys, to show their skill, used
to drive against things so closely as absolutely to touch, yet without
injury. This they called a TOUCHER, or TOUCH-AND-GO, which was hence
applied to anything which was within an ace of ruin.

~Touchy~, peevish, irritable. Johnson terms it a low word.

~Tout.~ In sporting phraseology a TOUT signifies an agent in the
training districts, on the look-out for information as to the condition
and capabilities of those horses entering for a coming race. TOUTS often
get into trouble through entering private training-grounds. They,
however, are very highly paid, some making 40_l._ or 50_l._ a week
during the season. Now frequently called horse-watchers.

~Tout~, to look out, or watch.

~Touter~, a looker out, one who waits at railway stations and steamboat
piers, and touts for customers; a hotel runner. Term in general use.

~Touzle~, to romp with or rumple.—_Scotch._

~Towel~, to beat or whip. In old English phraseology a cudgel was termed
an oaken TOWEL—whence, perhaps, the verb.

~Towelling~, a rubbing down with an oaken TOWEL, a beating.

~Town and Gown.~ The fight which used to come off every 5th of November
between the undergrads and the “cads.” The sides used to shout
respectively “TOWN!” and “GOWN!” as war-cries.—_Oxford University._

~Town-lout~, a derogatory title at Rugby School for those pupils who
reside with their parents in the town, in contradistinction from those
who live in the boarding-houses.

~Tow-pows~, grenadiers. From the bearskins, most likely, unless it was
originally TALL-POWS, the grenadiers being the tallest men in the
company.

~Towzery gang~, swindlers who hire sale-rooms, usually in the suburbs,
for mock auction sales of cheap and worthless goods, and who advertise
their ventures as “Alarming Sacrifices,” “Important Sales of Bankrupts’
Stock,” &c. The American name for a mock auctioneer is a “Peter Funk.”

~Tracks~, “to make TRACKS,” to run away. _See_ STREAK.

~Tradesman~, one who thoroughly understands his business, whatever it
may be. No better compliment can be passed on an individual, whether his
profession be housebreaking, prizefighting, or that of a handicraftsman,
than the significant “He’s a regular TRADESMAN.”

~Translator~, a man who deals in old shoes or clothes, and refits them
for cheap wear. These people generally live in or about Dudley Street,
Seven Dials.

~Translators~, second-hand boots mended and polished, and sold at a low
price.

~Trap~, a “fast” term for a carriage of any kind. TRAPS, goods and
chattels of any kind, but especially luggage and personal effects; in
Australia, “swag.”

~Trapesing~, gadding or gossiping about in a slatternly way. Generally
applied to girls and women in low neighbourhoods, who wander from
public-house to public-house, and whose clothes are carelessly fastened,
causing them to trail on the ground.

~Traveller~, name given by one tramp to another. “A TRAVELLER at her
Majesty’s expense,” _i.e._, a transported felon, a convict.

~Tree~, “up a TREE,” in temporary difficulties,—out of the way.
American expression, derived from racoon or bear-hunting. When Bruin is
TREED, or is forced up a TREE by the dogs, it means that then the tug of
war begins. _See_ ’COON. Hence when an opponent is fairly run to bay,
and can by no evasion get off, he is said to be TREED. These expressions
originated with Colonel Crockett, of backwoods celebrity. In Scotland
the phrase is “up a close,” _i.e._, up a passage with no outlet, a
_cul-de-sac_, therefore suggestive of an unpleasant predicament.

~Triangles~, a slang term for _delirium tremens_, during a fit of which
everything appears out of the square.

~Trimmings~, the necessary adjuncts to anything cooked, but specially
applied to a boiled leg of mutton, as turnips, potatoes, bread, beer,
salt, &c. Bets are frequently made for a leg of mutton and TRIMMINGS. Or
one person will forfeit the mutton if another will “stand the
TRIMMINGS.” It is generally a supper feast, held in a public-house, and
the rule is for the landlord to charge as TRIMMINGS everything, except
the mutton, placed on the table previous to the removal of the cloth. A
boiled leg o’ mutton and TRIMMINGS will be always known as a “swarry” to
admirers of Sam Weller.

~Tripes~, the bowels.

    “Next morning Miss Dolly complained of her TRIPES,
    Drinking cold water had given her gripes.”

~Trollies~, or TROLLY-CARTS, term given by costermongers to a species of
narrow carts, which can either be drawn by a donkey or driven by hand.

~Trolling~, sauntering or idling, hence TROLL and TROLLOCKS, an idle
slut, a “moll,” which _see_.

~Trollop~, a slatternly woman, a prostitute.

~Trot~, to “run up,” to oppose, to bid against at an auction. Private
buyers at auctions know from experience how general is the opposition
against them from dealers, “knock-outs,” and other habitués of sales,
who regard the rooms as their own peculiar domain. “We TROTTED him up
nicely, didn’t we?” _i.e._, we made him (the private buyer) pay dearly
for what he bought.

~Trot out~, to draw out or exploit, to show off the abilities of a
companion; sometimes to roast for the amusement and with the assistance
of an assembled company.

~Trotter~, a tailor’s man who goes round for orders.—_University._

~Trotter cases~, shoes.

~Trotters~, feet. Sheep’s TROTTERS, boiled sheep’s feet, a favourite
street delicacy.

~Truck~, a hat—from the cap on the extremity of a mast.—_Sea._

~Truck~, to exchange or barter.

~Trucks~, trousers.

~Trull~, corruption of “troll” or “trollop,” a dirty, slatternly woman,
a prostitute of the lowest class.

~Trump~, a good fellow; “a regular TRUMP,” a jolly or good-natured
person—in allusion to a TRUMP card; “TRUMPS may turn up,” _i.e._,
fortune may yet favour me.

~Trunks~, short trousers worn above hose or tights.—_Theatrical._

~Try it on~, to make attempt, generally applied to an effort at
imposition. An extortionate charge or a begging-letter is frequently
described as “a regular TRY-ON.”

~Tub~, the morning bath. To TUB has now become a regular verb, so far as
colloquialism is concerned, though no one uses a TUB as the word was
originally understood.

~Tub-thumping~, preaching or speech-making, from the old Puritan fashion
of “holding forth” from a tub, or beer barrel, as a mark of their
contempt for decorated pulpits.

~Tubs~, nickname for a butterman.

~Tuck~, a schoolboy’s term for fruit, pastry, &c. TUCK IN, or TUCK OUT,
a good meal.

~Tuft-hunter~, a hanger on to persons of quality or wealth—one who
seeks the society of wealthy people. Originally University slang, but
now general.

~Tufts~, at the University, noblemen, who pay high fees and are
distinguished by golden TUFTS, or tassels, in their caps.

~Tumble~, to comprehend or understand. A coster was asked what he
thought of _Macbeth_, and he replied, “The witches and the fighting was
all very well, but the other moves I couldn’t TUMBLE to exactly; few on
us can TUMBLE to the jaw-breakers; they licks us, they do.”

~Tumble to pieces~, to be safely delivered, as in childbirth.

~Tune the old cow died of~, an epithet for any ill-played or discordant
piece of music. Originally the name of an old ballad, referred to by
dramatists of Shakspeare’s time.

~Tuns~, a name at Pembroke College, Oxford, for small silver cups, each
containing half a pint. Sometimes a TUN had a handle with a whistle,
which could not be blown till the cup was empty.

~Turf~, horse-racing, and betting thereon; “on the TURF,” one who
occupies himself with race-horse business; said also of a street-walker,
or nymph of the _pavé_.

~Turkey merchants~, dealers in plundered or contraband silk. Poulterers
are sometimes termed TURKEY MERCHANTS in remembrance of Horne Tooke’s
answer to the boys at Eton, who wished in an aristocratic way to know
what _his_ father was: “A TURKEY MERCHANT,” replied Tooke—his father
was a poulterer. TURKEY MERCHANT, also, was formerly slang for a driver
of turkeys or geese to market.

~Turnip~, an old-fashioned watch, so called from its general appearance,
if of silver. Also called “a frying-pan.” Old-fashioned gold watches are
called “warming-pans.”

~Turn it up~, to quit, change, abscond, or abandon; “Ned has TURNED IT
UP,” _i.e._, run away; “I intend TURNING IT UP,” _i.e._, leaving my
present abode or employment, or altering my course of life.

~Turn-out~, personal show or appearance; a man with a showy carriage and
horses is said to have a good TURN-OUT.

~Turn-over~, an apprentice who finishes with a second master the
indentures he commenced with another, who has died or become bankrupt.

~Turn up~, a street fight; a sudden leaving, or making off. An
unexpected slice of luck. Among sporting men bookmakers are said to have
a TURN UP when an unbacked horse wins.

~Turn up~, to appear unexpectedly. Also to happen; “Let’s wait, and see
what will TURN UP.”

~Turn up~, to make sick. People are said to be TURNED UP by
sea-sickness, or when they are made ill by excessive smoking or
drinking.

~Turned over~, remanded by the magistrate or judge for want of evidence.

~Turned up~, to be stopped and searched by the police. To be discharged
from a police-court or sessions-house; to be acquitted.

~Turnpike sailors~, beggars who go about dressed as sailors. A sarcastic
reference to the scene of their chief voyages.

~Tusheroon~, a crown piece, five shillings. Otherwise a bull or
cartwheel.

~Tussle~, a row, struggle, fight, or argument.

~Tussle~, to struggle, or argue.

~Twelve godfathers~, a jury, because they give a name to the crime the
prisoner before them has been guilty of, whether murder or manslaughter,
felony or misdemeanor. Consequently it is a vulgar taunt to say, “You
will be christened by TWELVE GODFATHERS some day before long.”

~Twelver~, a shilling.

~Twice-laid~, a dish made out of cold fish and potatoes.—_Sea._ Compare
BUBBLE AND SQUEAK, and RESURRECTION PIE.

~Twig~, style. Prime TWIG, in good order and high spirits.

~Twig~, to comprehend, as, “Do you TWIG?” Also, “Hop the TWIG,” to
decamp.

~Twist~, brandy and gin mixed.

~Twist~, capacity for eating, appetite; “He’s got a capital TWIST.”

~Twitchety~, nervous, fidgety.

~Twitter~, “all in a TWITTER,” in a fright or fidgety state.

~Two eighteener~, an Americanism for a man or woman of the fastest
kind—two minutes eighteen seconds, or close thereabouts, being the
fastest time for a mile recorded in connexion with the Transatlantic
national sport, trotting. “Two forty on a plank road,” a once favourite
expression with a similar meaning, derived from a feat of the famous
trotting mare Flora Temple, has died out since trotting has become
faster, and courses have been prepared on a different principle.

~Two-eyed-steak~, a red-herring or bloater. Otherwise “Billingsgate
pheasant.”

~Two-handed~, expert at fisticuffs. Ambidextrous generally.

~Two-handed game~, a game or proposal in which the chances are fairly
even; as, “I’ll punch your head;” “Ah, that’s a TWO-HANDED GAME—you’ll
get no good at that.”

~Two to one~, the pawnbroker’s sign of three balls. So called because it
is supposed by calculating humourists to be TWO TO ONE against the
redemption of a pledged article.

~Two upon ten~, or TWO PUN’ TEN, an expression used by assistants to
each other, in shops, when a customer of suspected honesty makes his
appearance. The phrase refers to “two eyes upon ten fingers,” shortened
as a money term to TWO PUN’ TEN. When a supposed thief is present, one
shopman asks the other if that TWO PUN’ (pound) TEN matter was ever
settled. The man knows at once what is meant, and keeps a careful watch
upon the person being served. If it is not convenient to speak, a piece
of paper is handed to the same assistant, bearing the, to him, very
significant amount of

    _£2: 10: 0_

_Compare_ SHARP, JOHN ORDERLY.

~Twopenny~, the head; “tuck in your TWOPENNY,” bend down your head.

~Twopenny-halfpenny~, paltry, insignificant. A TWOPENNY-HALFPENNY
fellow, a not uncommon expression of contempt.

~Twopenny-hops~, low dancing rooms, the price of admission to which was
formerly twopence. The clog hornpipe, the pipe dance, flash jigs, and
hornpipes in fetters, _à la_ Jack Sheppard, were the favourite
movements, all entered into with great spirit.

~Twopenny rope~, a lodging-house of the lowest kind, where tramps and
cadgers sleep on sacking stretched by means of ropes. Sleeping at these
places is called having “twopenn’orth of rope.”

~Tyburnia~, the Portman and Grosvenor Square district. It is facetiously
divided by the Londoners into “Tyburnia Felix,” “Tyburnia Deserta,” and
“Tyburnia Snobbica.” The old gallows at Tyburn stood near the N.E.
corner of Hyde Park, at the angle formed by the Edgware Road and the top
of Oxford Street. In 1778 this was two miles out of London.

~Tyburn tippet~, in the old hanging days, Jack Ketch’s rope.

~Tye~, or TIE, a neckerchief. Proper hosiers’ term now, but slang thirty
years ago, and as early as 1718.

~Tyke~, a Yorkshireman. Term used by themselves, as well as by
Southerners, in reference to them.

~Typo~, a printer.

~Ugly~, wicked, malicious, resentful.—_American._

~Ullages~, the wine of all sorts left in the bottoms of glasses at a
public dinner. This is emptied into a measure, and drunk behind the
screen or in any convenient place by the waiters, which accounts for
their stony glare and fishy appearance late in the evening. Maybe from
_Lat._ ULLUS, any.

~Unbleached American~, Yankee term, since the war, for coloured natives
of the United States.

~Uncle~, the pawnbroker. _See_ MY UNCLE.

~Under a cloud~, in difficulties. An evident reference to shady
circumstances.

~Under the rose.~ _See_ ROSE.

~Understandings~, the feet or boots. Men who wear exceptionally large or
thick boots, are said to possess good UNDERSTANDINGS.

~Understudy~, to STUDY a part for the stage, not with the view of
playing it at once, but so as to be ready in the event of anything
happening to its present representative. Some actors of position, who
suffer from delicate health, or mental weakness, have always other and
inferior, but more robust, artists UNDERSTUDYING their parts.

~Unfortunate~, a modern euphuism for a prostitute, derived from Thomas
Hood’s beautiful poem of _The Bridge of Sighs_:—

    “One more UNFORTUNATE,
    Weary of breath,
    Rashly importunate,
    Gone to her death.”

It is almost needless to remark that the poet had no intention of using
the word in any but its widest and most general sense.

~Unicorn~, a style of driving with two wheelers abreast and one
leader—termed in the United States a “spike team.” “Tandem” is one
wheeler and one leader. “Random,” three horses in line. “Manchester”
means three horses abreast. _See_ HARUM-SCARUM.

~Unlicked~, ill-trained, uncouth, rude, and rough; an “UNLICKED cub” is
a loutish youth who has never been taught manners; from the tradition
that a bear’s cub, when brought into the world, has no shape or symmetry
until its dam licks it into form with her tongue. Possibly said of a boy
who has been petted, _i.e._, who has been insufficiently thrashed or
licked. Case of spared rod and spoilt child.

~Unparliamentary~, or UNSCRIPTURAL, language, words unfit for use in
ordinary conversation.

~Unutterables~, or UNWHISPERABLES, trousers. _See_ INEXPRESSIBLES.

~Up~, “to be UP to a thing or two,” to be knowing, or understanding; “to
put a man UP to a move,” to teach him a trick; “it’s all UP with him,”
_i.e._, it is all over with him; when pronounced U.P., naming the two
letters separately, means settled, or done UP. “UP a tree,” _see_ TREE.
“UP to snuff,” wide awake, acquainted with the last new move; “UP to
one’s gossip,” to be a match for one who is trying to take you in; “UP
to slum,” proficient in roguery, capable of committing a theft
successfully; “what’s UP?” what is the matter? what is the news?

~U.P.~, United Presbyterian Church of Scotland.

~Upper Benjamin~, or BENJY, a great coat; originally “Joseph,” but,
because of the preponderance of tailors named BENJAMIN, altered in
deference to them.

~Upper storey~, or UPPER LOFT, a person’s head; “his UPPER STOREY is
unfurnished,” _i.e._, he does not know very much. “Wrong in his UPPER
STOREY,” crazy. _See_ CHUMP.

~Uppish~, proud, arrogant.

~Used up~, broken-hearted, bankrupt, fatigued, vanquished.

~Vakeel~, a barrister.—_Anglo-Indian._

~Vamos~, VAMOUS, or VAMOOSH, to go, or be off. Spanish, VAMOS, “Let us
go!” Probably NAMUS, or NAMOUS, the costermonger’s word, was from this.

~Vamp~, to spout, to leave in pawn. Also to cobble, as, “a VAMPED play,”
and “a VAMPED accompaniment,” both terms reflecting discredit on the
work, but not necessarily upon the musician.

~Vamps~, old, or refooted stockings. From VAMP, to piece.

~Vardo~, to look; “VARDO the carsey,” look at the house. VARDO formerly
was old cant for a waggon. This is by low Cockneys generally pronounced
VARDY.

~Vardy~, verdict, vulgarly used as opinion, thus, “My VARDY on the
matter is the same as yourn.”

~Varmint.~ “You young VARMINT, you!” you bad, or naughty boy. Corruption
of VERMIN.

~Varnisher~, an utterer of false sovereigns. Generally “snide-pitcher.”

~’Varsity~, either UNIVERSITY—more rarely University College, Oxford.

~Velvet~, the tongue; especially the tongue of a magsman. Also, men who
have succeeded in their speculations, especially on the turf, are said
to stand on VELVET.

~Veneer~, the artificiality of society, conventionality. Dickens
expressed his dislike for certain forms of VENEER repeatedly, and
especially by means of his Veneerings in _Our Mutual Friend_.

~Vet~, colloquial term for VETERINARIAN.

~Vic~, the Victoria Theatre, London. Also the street abbreviation of the
Christian name of her Majesty the Queen.

~Village~, or THE VILLAGE, _i.e._, London. Birmingham is called “the
hardware VILLAGE.” Also a Cambridge term for a disreputable suburb of
that town, viz., Barnwell, generally styled “the VILLAGE.”

~Ville~, or VILE, a town or village—pronounced PHIAL, or
VIAL.—_French._

~Vinnied~, mildewed, or sour.—_Devonshire._

~Voker~, to talk; “can you VOKER Romany?” can you speak the canting
language?—_Latin_, VOCARE; _Spanish_, VOCEAR.

~Vowel.~ “To VOWEL a debt” is to acknowledge with an I O U.

~Vulpecide~, one who shoots or traps foxes, or destroys them in any way
other than that of hunting. A foxhunter regards a VULPECIDE as rather
worse than an ordinary murderer.

~Wabble~, or WOBBLE, to move from side to side, to roll about. Johnson
terms it “a low, barbarous word.”

~Walk into~, to overcome, to demolish; “I’ll WALK INTO his affections,”
_i.e._, I will scold or thrash him. “He WALKED INTO the grub,” _i.e._,
he demolished it. WALK INTO also means to get into the debt of any one,
as “He WALKED INTO the affections of all the tradesmen in the
neighbourhood.”

~Walk-over~, a re-election without opposition.—_Parliamentary_, but
derived from the turf, where a horse which has no rivals WALKS OVER the
course. _See_ DEAD HEAT.

~Walk your chalks~, be off, or run away,—spoken sharply by any one who
wishes to get rid of a troublesome person. _See_ CHALKS.

~Walker~, a letter-carrier or postman. From an old song, called,
“Walker, the twopenny postman.”

~Walker!~ or HOOKEY WALKER! an ejaculation of incredulity, used when a
person is telling a story which you know to be all gammon, or worse. One
explanation of the phrase is this:—“Years ago there was a person named
Walker, an aquiline-nosed Jew, who exhibited an orrery, which he called
by the erudite name of ‘Eidouranion.’ He was also a popular lecturer on
astronomy, and often, telescope in hand, invited his pupils to ‘take a
sight’ at the moon and stars. The lecturer’s phrase struck his schoolboy
auditory, who frequently ‘took a sight’ with that gesture of
outstretched arm and adjustment to nose and eye which was the first
garnish of the popular saying. The next step was to assume phrase and
gesture as the outward and visible mode of knowingness in general.” This
has been denied, however, and a statement made that HOOKEY WALKER was a
magistrate of dreaded acuteness and incredulity, whose hooked nose gave
the title of “beak” to all his successors; it is also said, moreover,
that the gesture of applying the thumb to the nose and agitating the
little finger, as an expression of “Don’t you wish you may get it?” is
considerably older than the first story would seem to indicate. There
are many and various explanations of the term, given according to the
development of fancy.—_Notes and Queries_, iv. 425.

~Walking the pegs~, a method of cheating at the game of cribbage, by a
species of legerdemain, the sharper either moving his own pegs forward,
or those of his antagonist backward, according to the state of the game.

~Wallflower~, a person who goes to a ball and looks on without dancing,
either from choice or through not being able to obtain a partner. From
the position.

~Wallflowers~, left-off and “regenerated” clothes exposed for sale on
the bunks and shop-boards of Seven Dials. _See_ REACH-ME-DOWNS.

~Wallabee-track~, Colonial slang for the tramp. When a man in Australia
is “on the road” looking for employment, he is said to be on the
WALLABEE-TRACK.

~Wallop~, to beat, or thrash. John Gough Nichols derives this word from
an ancestor of the Earl of Portsmouth, one Sir John Wallop, Knight of
the Garter, who in King Henry VIII.’s time distinguished himself by
WALLOPING the French; but it is more probably connected with wheal, a
livid swelling in the skin after a blow. _See_ POT-WALLOPER.

~Walloping~, a beating or thrashing; sometimes used in an adjective
sense, as big, or very large.

~Wapping~, or WHOPPING, of a large size, great.

~Warm~, rich, or well off.

~Warm~, to thrash or beat; “I’ll WARM your jacket.” To WARM the wax of
one’s ear is to give a severe blow on the side of the head. To WARM is
also to rate or abuse roundly. Also varied, as, “to make it hot” for any
one.

~Warming-pan~, a large old-fashioned gold watch. A person placed in an
office to hold it for another. _See_ W.P.

~War-paint~, evening dress. When people go out in full costume they are
often said to have their WAR-PAINT on. Also, military “full-fig.”

~Wash~, “It wont WASH,” _i.e._, will not stand investigation, will not
“bear the rub,” is not genuine, can’t be believed.

~Waster~, a useless, clumsy, or ill-made person.

~Watch and seals~, a sheep’s head and pluck.

~Watchmaker~, a pickpocket or stealer of watches. Often called “a
WATCHMAKER in a crowd.”

~Water-bewitched~, very weak tea, the third brew (or the first at some
houses). Sometimes very weak tea is called “husband’s tea,” in allusion
to the wife taking the first brew, and leaving the rest for her husband.
Also grog much diluted.

~Water-dogs~, Norfolk dumplings.

~Water gunner~, a marine artilleryman.

~Water the dragon~, or WATER ONE’S NAG, a hint for retiring.

~Waterman~, a blue silk handkerchief. The friends of the Oxford and
Cambridge boats’ crews always wear these—light blue for Cambridge, and
a darker shade for Oxford.

~Wattles~, ears.

~Wax~, a rage. “Let’s get him in a WAX.” WAXY, cross, ill-tempered.

~Wayz-goose~, a printers’ annual dinner, the funds for which are
collected by stewards regularly appointed by “the chapel.”

~Weather eye~, the cautious eye. Any one who is supposed to have an
extra good knowledge of things in general, or to be hard to impose on or
cheat, is said to have his WEATHER EYE well open.

~Weather-headed~, so written by Sir Walter Scott in his _Peveril of the
Peak_, but it is more probably WETHER-HEADED, as applied to a person
having a “sheepish” look.

~Weaving~, a notorious card-sharping trick, done by keeping certain
cards on the knee, or between the knee and the under side of the table,
and using them when required by changing them for the cards held in the
hand.

~Weaving leather aprons.~ When a knowing blade is asked what he has been
doing lately, and does not choose to tell, his reply is, that he has
been very busy WEAVING LEATHER APRONS. (From the reports of a celebrated
trial for gold robbery on the South-Western Railway.) Other similar
replies are, “I have been making a trundle for a goose’s eye,” or a
“whim-wham to bridle a goose.” Sometimes a man will describe himself as
“a doll’s-eye WEAVER.”

~Wedge~, silver.—_Old Cant._

~Wedge-feeder~, a silver spoon.

~Weed~, a cigar; _the_ WEED, tobacco generally.

~Weed~, a hatband.

~Weight-for-age~, a sporting phrase which, applied to a race,
distinguishes it from a handicap or catch-weight event, and informs all
interested that the animals which run carry according to their ages, and
not their abilities. Winners of certain great races generally carry
penalties in addition to WEIGHT-FOR-AGE, for the purpose of equalizing
matters somewhat; but as a rule the results are fairly foreshadowed as
soon as in these races the horses are at the post, or as soon as the
starters are positively known.

~Wejee~, a chimney-pot. Often applied to any clever invention, as,
“That’s a regular WEJEE.”

~Welcher~, a person who makes a bet without the remotest chance of being
able to pay, and, losing it, absconds, or “makes himself scarce.” In the
betting ring a WELCHER is often very severely handled upon his swindling
practices being discovered. The Catterick “Clerk of the Course” once
provided some stout labourers and a tar-barrel for the special benefit
of the WELCHERS who might visit that neighbourhood. The word is modern,
but the practice is ancient.

    “One Moore, the unworthy incumbent of the ‘Suffolk curacy,’
    dedicated a book to ‘Duke Humphrey,’ and was then entirely lost
    sight of by his old college friends, till one of them espied him
    slung up in ‘the basket,’ for not paying his bets at a
    cock-pit.”—_Post and Paddock._

One writer says the term “arose from a fellow who took deposits on
account of Welsh ponies, which he said he was importing, and never
delivered them.” It is not unfrequently suggested by irreverent persons
that the word was suggested by the dislike his gracious Majesty George
the Fourth had, when a young man, for settling. Others derive it from
the nursery rhyme,

    “Taffy was a Welshman, Taffy was a thief.”

There can be no doubt that, from the days when the stout Earl of
Chester and others were constantly employed in checking and cutting off
the expeditions of their neighbours till comparatively recently, the
term “Welshman” has been hardly one of kindness. It is not hard,
therefore, to imagine its use on the Roodee, and its subsequent
corruption into WELCHER. The spelling of the word, WELCHER or WELSHER,
is optional.

~Well~, to pocket, to save money. Any one of fair income and miserly
habits is said to “WELL it.”

~Welt~, to thrash with a strap or stick. Probably meaning to raise
wheals.

~West central~, a water-closet, the initials being the same as those of
the London Postal District. It is said that for this reason very
delicate people refuse to obey Rowland Hill’s instructions in this
particular. An old maid, who lived in this district, was particularly
shocked at having W.C. marked on all her letters, and informed the
letter-carrier that she could not think of submitting to such an
indecent fashion. On being informed that the letters would not be
forwarded without the obnoxious initials, she remarked that she would
have them left at the Post-Office. “Then, marm,” said the fellow, with a
grin, “they will put P.O. on them, which will be more ondacenter than
the tother.”

~Wet~, a drink, a drain.

~Wet~, to drink. Low people generally ask an acquaintance to WET any
recently purchased article, _i.e._, to stand treat on the occasion. “WET
(originally WHET, to sharpen,) your whistle,” _i.e._, take a drink; “WET
the other eye,” _i.e._, take another glass. _See_ SHED A TEAR.

~Wet Quaker~, a man who pretends to be religious, and is a dram-drinker
on the sly.

~Wet un~, a diseased cow, unfit for human food, but nevertheless sold to
make into sausages. _Compare_ STAGGERING-BOB.

~Whack~, a share or lot. “Give me my WHACK,” give me my
share.—_Scotch_, SWEG, _or_ SWACK.

~Whack~, or WHACKING, a blow, or a thrashing.

~Whack~, to beat.

~Whacker~, a lie of unusual dimensions, sometimes called a “round un.”

~Whacking~, large, fine, or strong.

~Whacks~, to go WHACKS, to divide equally; to enter into partnership.

~Whale~, “very like a WHALE,” said of anything that is very improbable.
A speech of Polonius’s in _Hamlet_.

~What d’yecall’em~, a similar expression to “thingumy.”

~Wheeze~, a joke, an anecdote, or dialogue, not strictly connected with
a piece that is being played, but introduced by an actor, sometimes with
the assistance and for the benefit of others. The dialogues which take
place between the songs at nigger entertainments are also known as
WHEEZES. The word actually means a new notion as applied to dialogue.

~Wherret~, or WORRIT, to scold, trouble, or annoy.—_Old English._

~Whid~, a word. Sometimes, a fib, a falsehood, a word too much.—_Modern
Slang_, from the ancient cant.

~Whiddle~, to enter into a parley, or hesitate with many words, &c.; to
inform, or discover. _See_ WHEEDLE.

~Whim-wham~, an alliterative term, synonymous with fiddle-faddle,
riff-raff, &c., denoting nonsense, rubbish, &c.

~Whip~, after the usual allowance of wine is drunk at mess, those who
wish for more put a shilling each into a glass handed round to procure a
further supply. WHIP-ROUND is now a common term for a subscription of a
similar kind to that described.

~Whip~, to “WHIP anything up,” to take it up quickly; from the method of
hoisting heavy goods or horses on board ship by a WHIP, or running
tackle, from the yard-arm. Generally used to express anything
dishonestly taken.

~Whip~, the member of the House of Commons whose duty it is to collect
and keep together his party to vote at divisions. To give him greater
influence, the ministerial WHIP holds, or is supposed to hold, the minor
patronage of the Treasury.

~Whipjack~, a sham shipwrecked sailor, called also a turnpike-sailor.

~Whip the cat~, when an operative works at a private house by the day.
Term used amongst tailors and carpenters.

~Whipper-snapper~, a waspish, diminutive person.

~Whisper~, a tip given in secret, a rumour which is spread under the
pretence of its being a secret. To “give the WHISPER,” is to give a
quick tip to any one. An owner’s final instruction to his jockey is
called “the WHISPER at the post.”

~Whisper~, to borrow money—generally small sums—as, “He WHISPERED me
for a tanner.”

~Whisperer~, a constant borrower.

~Whistle~, “as clean as a WHISTLE,” neatly, or “slickly done,” as an
American would say; “To whet (or more vulgarly wet) one’s WHISTLE,” to
take a drink. This last is a very old expression. Chaucer says of the
Miller of Trumpington’s wife (_Canterbury Tales_, 4153)—

    “So was hir joly WHISTAL well y-wet.”

“To WHISTLE for anything,” to stand small chance of getting it, from the
nautical custom of WHISTLING for a wind in a calm, which of course comes
none the sooner for it. “To pay for one’s WHISTLE,” to pay extravagantly
for any fancy.

~Whistling-Billy~, or PUFFING-BILLY, a locomotive engine.

~Whistling-shop~, a place in which spirits are sold without a licence.

~Whitechapel~ or WESTMINSTER BROUGHAM, a costermonger’s donkey-barrow.

~Whitechapel~, anything mean or paltry. Potting one’s opponent at
billiards is often known as “WHITECHAPEL play.”

~Whitechapel~, in tossing, when “two out of three wins.” _See_ SUDDEN
DEATH.

~Whitechapel fortune~, a clean gown and a pair of pattens.

~White eye~, military slang for a very strong and deleterious kind of
whisky, so called because its potency is believed to turn the eyes round
in the sockets, leaving the whites only visible.

~White feather~, “to show the WHITE FEATHER,” to evince cowardice. In
times when great attention was paid to the breeding of game-cocks, a
white feather in the tail was considered a proof of cross-breeding.

~White horses~, the foam on the crests of waves, seen before or after a
storm.

    “Now the wild white horses play.
    Champ and chafe and toss in the spray.
      Children, dear, let us away,
      This way, this way.”—_Matthew Arnold._

~White lie~, a harmless lie, one told to reconcile people at variance.
“Mistress is not at home, sir,” is a WHITE LIE often told by servants.

~White-livered~, or LIVER-FACED, cowardly, much afraid, very mean.

~White prop~, a diamond pin.—_East London._

~White satin~, gin,—term amongst women. _See_ SATIN.

~White serjeant~, a man’s superior officer in the person of his better
half.

~White tape~, gin,—term used principally by female servants. _See_
RIBBON.

~White un~, a silver watch.

~White wine~, the fashionable term for gin.

    “Jack Randall then impatient rose,
      And said, ‘Tom’s speech were just as fine
    If he would call that first of GOES
      By that genteeler name—WHITE WINE.’”

        _Randall’s Diary_, 1820.

~Whitewash~, to rehabilitate. A person who took the benefit of the
Insolvent Act was said to have been WHITEWASHED. Now said of a person
who compromises with his creditors.

~Whitewash~, a glass of sherry as a finale, after drinking port and
claret.

~Whittle~, to nose or peach.—_Old Cant._ To cut and hack as with a
pocket-knife.—_American._

~Whop~, to beat, or hide. Corruption of WHIP; sometimes spelt WAP.

~Whop-straw~, cant name for a countryman; Johnny WHOP-STRAW, in allusion
to threshing.

~Whopper~, a big one, a lie. A lie not easily swallowed.

~Widdle~, to shine. _See_ OLIVER.

~Wide-awake~, a broad-brimmed felt or stuff hat,—so called because it
never had a nap, and never wants one.

~Wido~, wide awake, no fool.

~Wife~, a fetter fixed to one leg.—_Prison._

~Wiffle-woffles~, in the dumps, sorrow, stomach-ache.

~Wig~, move off, go away.—_North Country Cant._

~Wigging~, a rebuke before comrades. If the head of a firm calls a clerk
into the parlour, and rebukes him, it is an EARWIGGING; if done before
the other clerks, it is a WIGGING.

~Wild~, a village.—_Tramps’ term._ _See_ VILE.

~Wild~, vexed, cross, passionate,—said to be from WILLED (SELF-WILLED),
in opposition to “tamed” or “subdued.” In the United States the word
“mad” is supplemented with a vulgar meaning similar to our Cockneyism
WILD; and to make a man mad on the other side of the Atlantic is to vex
him, or “rile” his temper—not to render him a raving maniac, or a fit
subject for Bedlam.

~Wild Irishman~, the train between Euston and Holyhead, in connection
with the Kingstown mail-boats.

~Wild oats~, youthful pranks. A fast young man is said to be “sowing his
WILD OATS.”

~William~, a bill. The derivation is obvious.

~Willow~, a cricket-bat. From the material of which it is made. The
great batsman, W. G. Grace, is often called “champion of the WILLOW.”

~Wind~, “to raise the WIND,” to procure money; “to slip one’s WIND,” a
coarse expression, meaning to die. _See_ RAISE.

~Wind~, “I’ll WIND your cotton,” _i.e._, I will give you some trouble.
The Byzantine General, Narses, used the same kind of threat to the Greek
Empress,—“I will spin a thread that they shall not be able to unravel.”

~Windows~, the eyes, or “peepers.”

~Winey~, intoxicated.

~Winged~, hurt, but not dangerously, by a bullet. Originally to be shot
in the arm or shoulder. To slightly wound birds is to WING them.

~Winkin~, “he went off like WINKIN,” _i.e._, very quickly. From WINK, to
shut the eye quickly.

~Winks~, periwinkles.

~Winn~, a penny—_Ancient Cant._ _See_ introductory chapter.

~Wipe~, a pocket-handkerchief.—_Old Cant._

~Wipe~, a blow. Frequently sibilated to SWIPE, a cricket-term.

~Wipe~, to strike; “he fetcht me a WIPE over the knuckles,” he struck me
on the knuckles; “to WIPE a person down,” to flatter or pacify; “to wipe
off a score,” to pay one’s debts, in allusion to the slate or chalk
methods of account-keeping; “to WIPE a person’s eye,” to shoot game
which he has missed; hence to obtain an advantage by superior activity.
With old topers “WIPING one’s eye,” is equivalent to giving or taking
another drink.

~Wipe-out~, to kill or utterly destroy. This is an Americanism, but is
in pretty general use here.

~Wire-in~, a London street phrase in general use, which means to go in
with a will. In its original form of “WIRE-IN, and get your name up,” it
was very popular among London professional athletes. The phrase is now
general, and any one who has a hard task before him, knows he must
WIRE-IN to bring matters to a successful issue.

~Wire-pullers~, powerful political partisans, who do their work from
“behind the scenes.”

~With and without~, words by themselves, supposed to denote the
existence or non-existence of sugar in grog. Generally “warm WITH” and
“cold WITHOUT.”

~Wobble-shop~, a shop where beer is sold without a licence.

~Wobbler~, a foot soldier, a term of contempt used by cavalrymen.

~Wobbly~, rickety, unsteady, ill-fitting.

~Wolf~, to eat greedily.

~Wooden spoon~, the last junior optime who takes a University
degree; denoting one who is only fit to stay at home, and stir
porridge.—_Cambridge._ The expression is also parliamentary slang, and
is applied to the member of the ministry whose name appears in the
division lists least frequently. At the ministerial dinner annually held
at Greenwich, such member sometimes has a wooden spoon presented to him.

~Wooden surtout~, a coffin, generally spoken of as a WOODEN SURTOUT with
nails for buttons.

~Wooden wedge~, the last name in the classical honours’ list at
Cambridge. The last in mathematical honours had long been known as the
WOODEN SPOON; but when the classical Tripos was instituted in 1824, it
was debated among the undergraduates what sobriquet should be given to
the last on the examination list. Curiously enough, the name that year
which happened to be last was WEDGEWOOD (a distinguished Wrangler).
Hence the title.

[Illustration]

~Wool~, courage, pluck; “you are not half-WOOLED,” term of reproach from
one thief to another.

~Wool~, bravery, pluck. Term much in use among pugilists and their
admirers. The highest praise that can be bestowed on a man of courage in
lower-class circles is that which characterizes him as being “a reg’lar
wooled un,” or “a rare WOOL-TOPPED UN.” Derived from the great pluck and
perseverance shown by many pugilists of whole or partial colour, from
Molyneux down to Bob Travers.

~Woolbird~, a lamb; “wing of a WOOLBIRD,” a shoulder of lamb.

~Wool-gathering~, said of any person’s wits when they are wandering, or
in a reverie.

~Wool-hole~, the workhouse.

~Woolly~, out of temper.

~Woolly~, a blanket.

~Work~, to plan, or lay down and execute any course of action, to
perform anything; “to WORK the bulls,” _i.e._, to get rid of false crown
pieces; “to work the oracle,” to succeed by manœuvring, to concert a
wily plan, to victimize,—a possible reference to the stratagems and
bribes used to corrupt the Delphic oracle, and cause it to deliver a
favourable response. “To WORK a street or neighbourhood,” to try at each
house to sell all one can, or to bawl so that every housewife may know
what is to be sold. The general plan is to drive a donkey-barrow a short
distance, and then stop and cry. The term implies thoroughness; to “WORK
a street well” is a common saying with a coster. “To WORK a benefit” is
to canvass among one’s friends and acquaintances.

~Worm.~ _See_ PUMP.

~Worm~, a policeman.

~Worming~, removing the beard of an oyster or mussel.

~W. P.~, or WARMING-PAN. A clergyman who holds a living _pro tempore_,
under a bond of resignation, is styled a W. P., or WARMING-PAN rector,
because he keeps the place warm for his successor. WARMING-PAN was a
term first popularly applied to a substitute in the reign of James II.

~Wrinkle~, an idea, or a fancy; an additional piece of knowledge.

~Write~, as “to WRITE one’s name on a joint,” to leave the impression of
one’s handiwork thereon, to have the first cut at anything; to leave
visible traces of one’s presence anywhere.

~Wylo~, be off.—_Anglo-Chinese._

~X.~, or LETTER X, a method of arrest used by policemen with desperate
ruffians,—by getting a firm grasp on the collar, and drawing the
captive’s hand over the holding arm, and pressing the fingers down in a
peculiar way—the captured person’s arm in this way can be more easily
broken than extricated.

~Yack~, a watch; to “church a YACK,” to take it out of its case to avoid
detection, otherwise to “christen a YACK.”

~Yaffle~, to eat.—_Old English._

~Yahoo~, a person of coarse or degraded habits. Derived from the use of
the word by Swift.

~Yam~, to eat. This word is used by the lowest class all over the world;
by the Wapping sailor, West Indian negro, or Chinese coolie. When the
fort, called the Dutch Folly, near Canton, was in course of erection by
the Hollanders, under the pretence of being intended for an hospital,
the Chinese observed a box containing muskets among the alleged hospital
stores. “Hy-aw!” exclaimed John Chinaman, “How can sick man YAM gun?”
The Dutch were surprised and massacred the same night.

~Yappy~, soft, foolish; mostly applied to an over-generous person, from
the fact that it originally meant one who paid for everything. YAP is
back slang for pay, and often when a man is asked to pay more than he
considers correct, he says, “Do you think I’m YAPPY?” do you think I’m
paying mad? Thus slang begets slang.

~Yard of clay~, a long, old-fashioned tobacco pipe; also called a
churchwarden.

~Yarmouth capon~, a bloater, or red herring.

~Yarmouth mittens~, bruised hands.—_Sea._

~Yarn~, a long story, or tale; “a tough YARN,” a tale hard to be
believed; “spin a YARN,” to tell a tale.—_Sea._

~Yay-nay~, “a poor YAY-NAY” fellow, one who has no conversational power,
and can only answer YEA or NAY to a question.

~Yellow-belly~, a native of the fens of Lincolnshire, or the Isle of
Ely—in allusion to the frogs and yellow-bellied eels caught there.

~Yellow-boy~, a sovereign, or any gold coin.

~Yellow-gloak~, a jealous man.

~Yellow-Jack~, the yellow fever prevalent in the West Indies.

~Yellow-man~, a yellow silk handkerchief.

~Yellows~, a term of reproach applied to Bluecoat and other charity
school boys.

~Yid~, or YIT, a Jew. YIDDEN, the Jewish people. The Jews use these
terms very frequently.

~Yokel~, a countryman. Probably from yoke, representative of his
occupation. Some fancy, however, that the word was originally YOWKEL, in
imitation of the broad tones of country labourers.

~Yokuff~, a chest, or large box.

~Yorkshire~, “to YORKSHIRE,” or “come YORKSHIRE over any person,” to
cheat or cozen him. The proverbial over-reaching of the rustics of this
county has given rise to the phrase, which is sometimes pronounced
Yorshar. To put Yorshar to a man, is to trick or deceive him. This
latter is from a work in the Lancashire dialect, 1757.

~Yorkshire compliment~, a gift of something useless to the giver.
Sometimes called a North-country compliment.

~Yorkshire estates;~ “I will do it when I come into my YORKSHIRE
ESTATES,”—meaning if I ever have the money or the means.

~Yorkshire reckoning~, a reckoning in which every one pays his own
share.

~Younker~, in street language, a lad or a boy. Term in general use
amongst costermongers, cabmen, and old-fashioned people. Barnefield’s
_Affectionate Shepherd_, 1594, has the phrase, “a seemelie YOUNKER.”
_Danish_ and _Friesic_, JONKER. In the navy, a naval cadet is usually
termed a YOUNKER.

~Your nibs~, yourself. _See_ NIBS.

~Yoxter~, a convict returned from transportation before his time.

~Ziff~, a juvenile thief.

~Ziph~, LANGUAGE OF, a way of disguising English in use among the
students at Winchester College. Compare MEDICAL GREEK. De Quincey, in
his _Autobiographic Sketches_, says that he acquired this language as a
boy, from a Dr. Mapleton, who had three sons at Winchester who had
imported it from thence as their sole accomplishment, and that after the
lapse of fifty years he could, and did with Lord Westport, converse in
it with ease and rapidity. It was communicated at Winchester to
new-comers for a fixed fee of half a guinea. The secret is this,—repeat
the vowel or diphthong of every syllable, prefixing to the vowel so
repeated the letter G, and placing the accent on the intercalated
syllable. Thus, for example, “Shall we go away in an hour?” “Shagall
wege gogo agawagay igin agan hougour?” “Three hours we have already
stayed,” “Threegee hougours wege hagave agalreageadygy stagayed.” De
Quincey could hardly have been considered complimentary to his own
memory if he supposed that he, or for the matter of that any one
possessed of brains, could forget anything so simple; or that, if
forgotten until suddenly recalled, it could not be mastered by any
sensible person in a minute. The language of ZIPH is far inferior to any
of the slangs manufactured by the lower classes. Evidently any consonant
will answer the purpose; F or L would be softer, and so far better. This
ZIPH system is not confined to Winchester College, as it is recorded and
described amongst many other modes of cryptical communication, oral and
visual, spoken, written, and symbolic, in an _Essay towards a Real
Character and a Philosophic Language_ (founded on or suggested by a
treatise published just before, by Geo. Dalgarne), by John Wilkins,
Bishop of Chester, published by order of the Royal Society, fol. 1668,
and as the bishop does not speak of it as a recent invention, it may
probably at that time have been regarded as an antique device for
conducting a conversation in secrecy amongst bystanders—which says very
little for either the designers or the bystanders.

~Zounds!~ a sudden exclamation—abbreviation of “God’s wounds!”


FOOTNOTES:

[57] Since the first edition of this work a great alteration has taken
place in this respect. Though topical ballads are now often sung, the
singers confine themselves to low neighbourhoods, and as soon as a
policeman approaches, if ever he does, they make themselves scarce. The
practice is singular. One man gets as far through a line as he can, and
when his voice cracks his companion takes up. For this reason the
business is as a rule conducted by a man and woman, or sometimes by a
woman and child. The writing of these ditties is generally work of a
character for which even 7_s._ 6_d._ would be a high rate of pay.—ED.

[58] Eurasian is not a child of mixed race, but one born of European
parents in an Asiatic clime. A similar error exists with regard to the
word creole, which is generally supposed to mean a man or woman in whom
white and black strains are mixed. I need not say how wrong this is, but
the vulgar error is none the less current.—ED.

[59] There is something so extremely humorous and far-fetched about this
explanation, that though it is utterly unworthy of its place in a
dictionary, I, finding it there, have not the heart to cut it out.—ED.

[60] Of course by those who don’t know the scientific way used in
“canine exhibitions” and dog-fights—of biting their tails till they
turn round to bite the biter.—ED.




SOME ACCOUNT

OF

THE BACK SLANG.


The costermongers of London number between thirty and forty thousand.
Like other low tribes, they boast a language, or secret tongue, by which
they hide their designs, movements, and other private affairs. This
costers’ speech offers no new fact, or approach to a fact, for
philologists; it is not very remarkable for originality of construction,
neither is it spiced with low humour, as other cant. But the
costermongers boast that it is known only to themselves; that it is far
beyond the Irish, and puzzles the Jews. This is, however, but a poor
fiction; for, as will be seen, the slang current among them is of the
crudest conception, and only difficult to the most ignorant. Any one of
the smallest pretensions to ability could learn back slang—could, in
fact, create it for himself—as far as the costers’ vocabulary extends,
in a couple of hours. Since the early editions of this work were
published back slang has become very common; and is now mostly spoken,
mixed however, with various other kinds of slang, in the public
markets—the new dead-meat market being, perhaps, strongest in the way
of pure—if the term may be used—back slang.

The main principle of this language is spelling the words backwards—or
rather, pronouncing them rudely backwards. Sometimes, for the sake of
harmony, an extra syllable is prefixed or annexed; and occasionally the
word receives quite a different turn, in rendering it backwards, from
what an uninitiated person would have expected. One coster told Mayhew
that he often gave the end of a word “a new turn, just as if he chorused
it with a tol-de-rol.” But then costermongers, and more especially those
who confided their joys and sorrows to the gentleman just named, are not
to be relied on. The coster has, of course, his own idea of the proper
way of spelling words, and is not to be convinced but by an overwhelming
show of learning,—and frequently not then, for he is a very headstrong
fellow. By the time a coster has spelt an ordinary word of two or three
syllables in the proper way, and then spelt it backwards, it has become
a tangled knot that no etymologist could unravel. The word “generalize,”
for instance, is considered to be “shilling” spelt backwards, while
“genitraf” is supposed to represent farthing. Sometimes slang and cant
words are introduced, and even these, when imagined to be tolerably well
known, are pronounced backwards. Very often, instead of a word being
spelt backwards right through, the syllables retain their original
order; the initial _h_ is pronounced as though _c_ were before it,
“tatch” being back slang for hat, and “flatch” the word supposed to
represent half. Again, the full words are shortened, as “gen” for
“generalize,” a shilling; and various other artifices are resorted to,
in the hope of adding to the natural difficulties of back slang.

This back language, back slang, or “kacab genals,” as it is called by
the costermongers themselves, is supposed to be regarded by the rising
generation of street-sellers as a distinct and regular mode of
intercommunication. People who hear this slang for the first time never
refer words, by inverting them, to their originals; and the “yanneps,”
“esclops,” and “nammows,” are looked upon as secret terms. Those who
practise the slang soon obtain a considerable stock vocabulary, so that
they converse rather from the memory than the understanding. Amongst the
senior costermongers, and those who pride themselves on their
proficiency in back slang, a conversation is often sustained for a whole
evening—that is, the chief words are in the back slang—especially if
any “flats” are present whom they wish to astonish or confuse.

The addition of an _s_ invariably forms the plural, so that this is
another source of complication. For instance, woman in the back slang is
“nammow,” and “nammows” is “women.” The explorer, then, in undoing the
back slang, and turning the word once more into English, would have a
novel and very extraordinary rendering of women. Where a word is
refractory in submitting to a back rendering, as in the case of “pound,”
letters are made to change positions for the sake of harmony; thus we
have “dunop,” a pound, instead of “dnuop,” which nobody could pleasantly
pronounce. Also all words of one syllable which end with two
consonants—such, for instance, as cold, drunk—become dissyllables when
read backwards, the vowel e being imagined between the then first and
second consonants, as “deloc,” “kennurd.” Others take the vowel as an
initial, girl being pronounced “elrig.” This arrangement, as a
modification to suit circumstances, may remind the reader of the Jews’
“Old clo’! old clo’!” instead of “Old clothes! old clothes!” which it is
supposed would tire the patience of even a Jew to repeat all day.

The back slang has been in vogue for many years. It is, as before
stated, very easily acquired, and is principally used by the
costermongers and others who practise it (as the specimen Glossary will
show) for communicating the secrets of their street tradings, the cost
of and profit on goods, and for keeping their natural enemies, the
police, in the dark. “Cool the esclop” (look at the police) is often
said among them, when one of the constabulary makes his appearance. It
is only fair to assume, however, that the police know as much or more
about the back slang than do the costers; and every child in a “shy”
neighbourhood knows the meaning of the phrase just quoted. Those who
regard the London costermonger as a fearful being are very much
mistaken,—he is singularly simple-minded and innocent, and has, indeed,
very little to conceal; but he certainly does like to wrap himself up as
in a garment of mystery, and sometimes believes that the few words of
slang he knows, mixed as they are, and troublesome as they have been to
him, form an impenetrable barrier between him and the rest of the world.
He is fond of exhibiting what knowledge he possesses, and so talks slang
in public much more than in private; but at most the slang words used
bear not forty per cent. proportion to the rest of his conversational
structure, even when he exerts himself to the uttermost limits of his
ability and education, and even when he is a leader in his walk of life.

Perhaps on no subject is the costermonger so silent as on his money
affairs. All costs and profits, he thinks, should be kept profoundly
secret. The back slang, therefore, gives the various small amounts very
minutely, but, as has been before remarked, these words are known
wherever common folk most do congregate, and are peculiar only for their
variations from the original in the way of pronunciation:—

    ~Flatch~, halfpenny.
    ~Yannep~, penny.
    ~Owt-yanneps~, twopence.
    ~Erth-yanneps~, threepence.
    ~Roaf-yanneps~, fourpence.
    ~Evif, or ewif-yanneps~, fivepence.
    ~Exis-yanneps~, sixpence.
    ~Nevis-yanneps~, sevenpence.
    ~Teaich, or theg-yanneps~, eightpence.
    ~Enin-yanneps~, ninepence.
    ~Net-yanneps~, tenpence.
    ~Nevelé-yanneps~, elevenpence.
    ~Evlénet-yanneps~, twelvepence.
    ~Generalize~, one shilling.
    ~Yannep-flatch~, three-halfpence.
    ~Owt-yannep-flatch~, twopence-halfpenny. The word “flatch”
        represents the odd halfpenny when added to any number of
        “yanneps.”
    ~Gen, or eno-gen~, one shilling. “Gen” is a contraction of
        “generalize.”
    ~Owt-gens~, two shillings.
    ~Erth-gens~, three shillings.

The “gens” continue in the same sequence as the “yanneps” above; but, as
a rule, the _s_ is left out, and “owt” or “erth gen” represents the
quantity. This is, however, matter of individual taste; and any reader
who is anxious to become proficient need not be afraid of committing a
solecism—that’s a good word for back slanging—by giving vent to any
peculiarity that may strike him. Variety is the charm of nature, we are
told; and in this particular, if in no other, back slang and nature
approach each other. So do extremes meet.

    ~Yenork~, a crown piece, or five shillings.
    ~Flatch-yenork~, half-a-crown. This is generally slurred into
        “flatch-a-nock.” The crown in full rarely receives the title
        “yenork” nowadays,—it is usually a “wheel” or “evif gen.”
    ~Flatch a dunop~, ten shillings, _i.e._, half a pound.

Beyond this amount the slangist reckons after an intricate and
complicated mode. Fifteen shillings would be “erth-evif-gen,” or,
literally, three times 5_s._; seventeen and sixpence would be
“erth-yenork-flatch,” or three crowns and a half; or, by another mode of
reckoning, “erth-evif-gen flatch-yenork,” _i.e._, three times 5_s._, and
half-a-crown.

    ~Dunop~, a pound. Varied by “Dick,” back slang for “quid.”

Further than which the costermonger seldom goes in money reckoning.

In the following Glossary only those words are given which are
continually used,—the terms connected with street traffic, the names
of the different coins, vegetables, fruit, and fish, technicalities of
police courts, &c. The reader might naturally think that a system of
speech so simple as the back slang would require no Glossary; but he
will quickly perceive, from the specimens given, that a great many words
in frequent use in a “back” sense, have become so twisted as to require
a little glossarial explanation.

This kind of slang, formed by reversing and transposing the letters of a
word, is not peculiar to the London costermongers. Instances of an
exactly similar secret dialect are found in the Spanish “Germania” and
French “Argot.” Thus:—

    _Spanish._   _Germania._    _English._

    PLATO.       TAPLO.         PLATE.
    DEMIA.       MEDIA.         STOCKINGS.

    _French._    _Argot._       _English._

    F’OL.        LOFFE.         FOOLISH.
    LORCEFE.     LA FORCE.      LA FORCE, the prison of that name.

The Bazeegars, a wandering tribe of jugglers in India, form a back
slang, on the basis of the Hindustanee, in the following manner:—

    _Hindustanee._      _Bazeegar._       _English._

    AG.                 GA.               FIRE.
    LAMBA.              BALUM.            LONG.
    DUM.                MUDU.             BREATH.




GLOSSARY OF THE BACK SLANG.

~Birk~, a “crib,”—a house.

~Cool~, to look.

~Cool him~, look at him. A phrase frequently used when one costermonger
warns another of the approach of a policeman, or when any person worthy
of notice passes by. When any old lady has been bargaining with a
costermonger, and leaves his barrow without purchasing, the proprietor
of the barrow will call out to the rest, “COOL the delo nammow,” which,
though it means literally nothing beyond “Look at the old woman,”
conveys to them an intimation that she is, from their point of view, a
nuisance, and should be treated as such.

~Dab~, bad.

~Dab tros~, a bad sort.

~Dabheno~, a bad one, sometimes a bad market. _See_ DOOGHENO.

~Da-erb~, bread.

~Deb~, or DAB, a bed; “I’m off to the DEB,” I’m going to bed.

~Delo nammow~, an old woman.

~Delog~, gold.

~Doog~, good.

~Doogheno~, literally “good-one,” but implying generally a good market,
a good man, &c.

~Doogheno hit~, one good hit. A coster remarks to a mate, “Jack made a
DOOGHENO HIT this morning,” implying that he did well at market, or sold
out with good profit. Actually a good hit only is intended, but
redundancy has its charms in the back slang as well as in more
pretentious literary efforts.

~Dunop~, a pound.

~Edgabac~, cabbage.

~Edgenaro~, an orange.

~E-fink~, a knife.

~Ekame~, a “make,” or swindle.

~Ekom~, a “moke,” or donkey.

~Elrig~, a girl.

~Emag~, game, “I know your little EMAG.”

~Enif~, fine.

~Enin gen~, nine shillings.

~Enin yanneps~, ninepence.

~Eno~, one.

~Erif~, fire.

~Erth~, three.

~Erth gen~, three shillings.

~Erth-pu~, three-up, a street game, played with three halfpence.

~Erth sith-noms~, three months,—a term of imprisonment unfortunately
very familiar to the lower orders. Generally known as a “drag.”

~Erth yanneps~, threepence.

~Esclop~, police, now used to signify a constable only. ESCLOP is
pronounced “slop” simply, but the _c_ was never sounded. A policeman is
now and then called, by some purist or stickler for etiquette, an
“esclopnam.”

~Es-roch~, a horse.

~Esuch~, a house.

~Evif-gen~, a crown, or five shillings.

~Evif-yanneps~, fivepence.

~Evlenet-gen~, twelve shillings.

~Evlenet sith-noms~, twelve months. Generally known as a “stretch.”

~Exis-evif-gen~, six times five shillings, _i.e._, 30_s._ All moneys may
be reckoned in this manner, either with YANNEPS or GENS. It is, however,
rarely or never done.

~Exis-evif-yanneps~, elevenpence,—literally, “sixpence and fivepence =
elevenpence.” This mode of reckoning, distinct from the preceding, is
only made by special arrangement amongst slangites, who wish to confound
their intimates.

~Exis gen~, six shillings.

~Exis sith-noms~, six months.

~Exis yanneps~, sixpence.

~Fi-heath~, a thief.

~Flatch~, half, or a halfpenny.

~Flatch kennurd~, half drunk.

~Flatch-yenork~, half-a-crown. _See_ preceding remarks.

~Flatchyannep~, a halfpenny.

~Gen~, twelvepence, or one shilling. Formerly imagined to be an
abbreviation of argent, cant term for silver.

~Generalize~, a shilling, almost invariably shortened to GEN.

~Genitraf~, a farthing.

~Gen-net~, or NET GEN, ten shillings.

~Genol~, long.

~Hel-bat~, a table. } The aspirate is matter of taste.

~Helpa~, an apple.  }

~Kanitseeno~, a stinking one. KANITS is a stink.

~Kennurd~, drunk.

~Kew~ (or more properly KEEU), a week.

~Kews~, SKEW, or SKEEU, weeks.

~Kirb~, a brick.

~Kool~, to look.

~Lawt~, tall.

~Ler-ac-am~, mackerel.

~Mottob~, bottom.

~Mur~, rum. A “nettock o’ MUR” is a quartern of rum.

~Nair~, rain.

~Nam~, a man.

~Nam esclop~, a policeman. _See_ ESCLOP.

~Nammow~, a woman; DELO NAMMOW, an old woman.

~Neel~, lean.

~Neergs~, greens.

~Net enin gen~, nineteen shillings.

~Net evif gen~, fifteen shillings.

~Net exis gen~, sixteen shillings.

~Net gen~, ten shillings, or half a sovereign.

~Net nevis gen~, seventeen shillings.

~Net rith gen~, thirteen shillings.

~Net roaf gen~, fourteen shillings. It will be seen by the foregoing
that the reckoning is more by tens than by “teens.” This is, however,
matter of choice, and any one wishing to be considered accomplished in
this description of slang, must do as he thinks best—must lead and not
be led.

~Net theg gen~, eighteen shillings.

~Net yanneps~, tenpence.

~Nevele gen~, eleven shillings.

~Nevele yanneps~, elevenpence.

~Nevis gen~, seven shillings.

~Nevis stretch~, seven years’ penal servitude.

~Nevis yanneps~, sevenpence.

~Nig~, gin.

~Noom~, the moon.

~Nos-rap~, a parson.

~Occabot~, tobacco; “tib fo OCCABOT,” bit of tobacco.

~Ogging ot tekram~, going to market.

~On~, no.

~On doog~, no good.

~Owt gen~, two shillings. } OWT is pronounced OAT.

~Owt yanneps~, twopence.  }

~Pac~, a cap.

~Pinnurt pots~, turnip tops.

~Pot~, top.

~Rape~, a pear.

~Reeb~, beer. “Top o’ REEB,” a pot of beer.

~Rev-lis~, silver.

~Rof-efil~, for life—sentence of punishment.

~Roaf-gen~, four shillings.

~Roaf-yanneps~, fourpence.

~Rutat~, or RATTAT, a “tatur,” or potato.

~See-otches~, shoes.

~Sey~, yes. Pronounced SEE.

~Shif~, fish.

~Sirretch~, cherries. Very often SIRRETCHES.

~Sith-nom~, a month. This is because the slang was made from months, not
month. Perhaps because the latter was not easy; perhaps because terms of
imprisonment run longer than a month, and are often enumerated in the
“kacab genals.” However it may be, “months” in this mode of speaking has
a double plural as it stands now.

~Slaoc~, coals.

~Slop~, a policeman. _See_ ESCLOP.

~Sneerg~, greens.

~Spinsrap~, parsnips.  }

~Sret-sio~, oysters.   }

~Sres-wort~, trousers. }

~Starps~, sprats.      } All these will take the _s_, which is now initial,

~Stoobs~, boots.       } after them, if desired, and, as may be seen, some

~Storrac~, carrots.    } take it doubly.

~Stun~, nuts.          }

~Stunlaw~, walnuts.    }

~Tach~, a hat.

~Taf~, fat. A TAF ENO is a fat man or woman, literally A FAT ONE.

~Taoc~, a coat. “Cool the DELO TAOC” means, “Look at the old coat,” but
is really intended to apply to the wearer as well, as professors of
mixed slangs might say, “Vardy his nibs in the snide bucket.”

~Taoc-tisaw~, a waistcoat.

~Teaich-gir~, right, otherwise TADGER.

~Tenip~, a pint.

~Theg~ (or TEAICH) gen, eight shillings.

~Theg~ (or TEAITCH) yanneps, eightpence.

~Tib~, a bit, or piece.

~Tol~, lot, stock, or share.

~Top-yob~, a potboy.

~Torrac~, a carrot. “Ekat a TORRAC.”

~Trork~, a quart.

~Trosseno~, literally, “one sort,” but professional slangists use it to
imply anything that is bad. TROSS, among costermongers, means anything
bad. It is probably a corruption of trash. Possibly, however, the
constant use of the words “dab-tros” may have led them in their
unthinking way to imagine that the latter word will do by itself.

~Wedge~, a Jew. This may look strange, but it is exact back slang.

~Wor-rab~, a barrow.

~Yad~, a day; YADS, days.

~Yadnarb~, brandy.

~Yannep~, a penny.

~Yannep a time~, a penny each. Costermongers say “a time” for many
things. They say a “bob a time,” meaning a shilling each for admission
to a theatre, or any other place, or that certain articles are charged a
shilling each. The context is the only clue to the exact meaning.

~Yannep-flatch~, three halfpence,—all the halfpence and pennies
continue in the same sequence, as for instance, OWT-YANNEP-FLATCH,
twopence-halfpenny.

~Yap pu~, pay up.

~Yeknod~, or JERK-NOD, a donkey.

~Yenork~, a crown.

~Yob~, a boy.

~Zeb~, best.

From these examples the apt student may fairly judge how to form his own
back slang to his own liking and that of his friends.




SOME ACCOUNT

OF

THE RHYMING SLANG.


There exists in London a singular tribe of men, known amongst the
“fraternity of vagabonds” as chaunters and patterers. Both classes are
great talkers. The first sing or chaunt through the public thoroughfares
ballads—political and humorous—carols, dying speeches, and the various
other kinds of gallows and street literature. The second deliver street
orations on grease-removing compounds, plating powders, high-polishing
blacking, and the thousand-and-one wonderful penny-worths that are
retailed to gaping mobs from a London kerb-stone.

They are quite a distinct tribe from the costermongers; indeed, amongst
tramps, they term themselves the “harristocrats of the streets,” and
boast that they live by their intellects. Like the costermongers,
however, they have a secret tongue or cant speech known only to each
other. This cant, which has nothing to do with that spoken by the
costermongers, is known in Seven Dials and elsewhere as the “rhyming
slang,” or the substitution of words and sentences which rhyme with
other words intended to be kept secret. The chaunter’s cant, therefore,
partakes of his calling, and he transforms and uses up into a rough
speech the various odds and ends of old songs, ballads, and street
nicknames, which are found suitable to his purpose. Unlike nearly all
other systems of cant, the rhyming slang is not founded upon allegory;
unless we except a few rude similes, thus—“I’m afloat” is the rhyming
cant for “boat,” “sorrowful tale” is equivalent to “three months in
jail,” “artful dodger” signifies a “lodger,” and a “snake in the grass”
stands for a “looking-glass”—a meaning that would delight a fat
Chinaman, or a collector of Oriental proverbs. But, as in the case of
the costers’ speech and the old gipsy-vagabond cant, the chaunters and
patterers so interlard this rhyming slang with their general remarks,
while their ordinary language is so smothered and subdued, that, unless
when they are professionally engaged, and talking of their wares, they
might almost pass for foreigners.

From the inquiries I have made of various patterers and “paper-workers,”
I learn that the rhyming slang was introduced about twelve or fifteen
years ago.[61] Numbering this class of oratorical and bawling wanderers
at twenty thousand, scattered over Great Britain, including London and
the large provincial towns, we thus see the number of English vagabonds
who converse in rhyme and talk poetry, although their habitations and
mode of life constitute a very unpleasant Arcadia. These nomadic poets,
like the other talkers of cant or secret languages, are stamped with the
vagabond’s mark, and are continually on the move. The married men mostly
have lodgings in London, and come and go as occasion may require. A few
never quit London streets, but the greater number tramp to all the large
provincial fairs, and prefer the “monkery” (country) to town life. Some
transact their business in a systematic way, sending a post-office order
to the Seven Dials’ printer for a fresh supply of ballads or penny
books, or to the “swag shop,” as the case may be, for trinkets and
gewgaws, to be sent on by rail to a given town by the time they shall
arrive there.

When any dreadful murder, colliery explosion, or frightful railway
accident has happened in a country district, three or four chaunters
are generally on the spot in a day or two after the occurrence, vending
and bawling “A True and Faithful Account,” &c., which “true and
faithful account” was concocted purely in the imaginations of
the successors of Catnach and Tommy Pitts,[62] behind the counters
of their printing-shops in Seven Dials. And but few fairs are held
in any part of England without the patterer being punctually at his
post, with his nostrums, or real gold rings (with the story of the wager
laid by the gentleman—_see_ FAWNEY-BOUNCING, in the Dictionary), or
savealls for candlesticks, or paste which, when applied to the strop,
makes the dullest razor keen enough to hack broom handles and sticks,
and after that to have quite enough sharpness left for splitting hairs,
or shaving them off the back of one of the hands of a clodhopper,
looking on in amazement. And Cheap John, too, with his coarse jokes, and
no end of six-bladed knives, and pocket-books, containing information
for everybody, with pockets to hold money, and a pencil to write with
into the bargain, and a van stuffed with the cheap productions of
Sheffield and “Brummagem,”—he, too, is a patterer of the highest order,
and visits fairs, and can hold a conversation in the rhyming slang.

Such is a rough description of the men who speak this jargon; and simple
and ridiculous as the vulgar scheme of a rhyming slang may appear, it
must always be regarded as a curious fact in linguistic history. In
order that the reader’s patience may not be too much taxed, only a
selection of rhyming words has been given in the Glossary,—and these
for the most part, as in the case of the back slang, are the terms of
every-day life, as used by this order of tramps and hucksters.

It must not be supposed, however, that the chaunter or patterer confines
himself entirely to this slang when conveying secret intelligence. On
the contrary, although he speaks not a “leash of languages,” yet is he
master of the beggar’s cant, and is thoroughly “up” in street slang. The
following letter, written by a chaunter to a gentleman who took an
interest in his welfare, will show his capabilities in this line:—

    Dear Friend,[63]

    Excuse the liberty, since i saw you last i have not earned a thick
    un, we have had such a Dowry of Parny that it completely Stumped
    Drory the Bossman’s Patter therefore i am broke up and not having
    another friend but you i wish to know if you would lend me the price
    of 2 Gross of Tops, Dies, or Croaks, which is 7 shillings, of the
    above-mentioned worthy and Sarah Chesham the Essex Burick for the
    Poisoning job, they are both to be topped at Springfield Sturaban on
    Tuesday next. i hope you will oblige me if you can, for it will be
    the means of putting a James in my Clye. i will call at your Carser
    on Sunday Evening next for an answer, for i want a Speel on the Drum
    as soon as possible. hoping you and the family are All Square,

    I remain Your obedient Servant,

The numerous allusions in the Glossary to well-known places in London
show that this rude speech was mainly concocted in the metropolis. The
police have made themselves partially acquainted with the back slang,
but they are still profoundly ignorant of the rhyming slang.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTE.

Since the foregoing was written, matters have changed considerably,
even, which I much doubt, if they ever were as is stated; for, as I have
already remarked, wherever opportunity has occurred, the costermonger,
the patterer, the chaunter, and the various other itinerants who “work”
London and the provinces, delight in making themselves appear a most
mysterious body; and this, when added to their natural disinclination to
commit themselves to anything like fact so far as their natural
enemies—inquirers, and well-dressed inquirers in particular—are
concerned, has caused all sorts of extraordinary stories to be set
afloat, which have ultimately led to an opinion becoming prevalent, that
the costermonger and his friends form a race of beings differing
entirely from those who mix in the ordinary humdrum routine of
respectable life. Nothing could really be much further from fact. Any
one who has ever been driven by stress of circumstances or curiosity to
take up a permanent or temporary residence in any of the lodging-houses
which abound in St. Giles’s, Saffron Hill, Turnmill Street, and in all
parts of the eastern district of the metropolis, will bear me out when I
say that a more commonplace individual, so far as his inner life is
concerned, than the London itinerant cannot possibly exist. Certainly he
is ignorant, and takes a very limited view of things in general, and
religion and politics in particular; but these peculiarities are held in
common with his betters, and so cannot be regarded as the special
prerogative of any class. If you ask him a question he will attempt to
mislead you, because, by your asking the question, he knows you are
ignorant of his way of life; and when he does not mystify from love of
mischief, as it appears he does from all published books I have seen
about him, he does so as a duty he owes his natural enemies, the parish
authorities and the tract distributors, the latter of whom he holds in
special abhorrence.

If the rhyming slang was ever, during its existence, regarded as a
secret language, its secrecy has long since departed from it. Far easier
of construction than even the back slang, it has been common, especially
in several printing-offices I could name, for many years, while
street-boys are great proficients in its small mysteries. The Glossary
which follows here will explain a good deal of its mechanism; but it
must be borne in mind that the rhymes are all matters of individual
opinion, and that if one man says Allacompain means rain, another is
quite justified in preferring Mary Blane, if his individual fancy lies
in that direction. And now, if there is any secret about the rhyming
slang, it is this—the rhyme is left out. This may at first seem
extraordinary; but on reflection it will be seen that there is no other
way of making the proceedings of its exponents puzzling to ordinarily
sharp ears which have received the slightest clue. Thus, when the first
word of a series only is used, and others in the sentence are made up
from the back, the centre and various slangs, there is some hope of
fogging an intruding listener to a private conversation. When a man is
drunk, the rhyming slang would illustrate that fact by the words
“Elephant’s trunk;” but the practised hand confines himself to the
statement that “Bill’s Elephants.” “Bullock’s horn” represents to pawn,
but an article is said to be “Bullocked” only; and so on through the
list, providing always that the curtailment represents two syllables; if
it does not, then the entire rhyme is given.

I think that this will be sufficient to guide those readers anxious to
become proficient themselves, or to understand others who are themselves
proficient at this item in the world of slang; and so I have nothing
more to say except to call attention to the fact that, in all the other
introductions, I have made my corrections, which have been neither few
nor unimportant, in the text; but that I could see no way of working on
the subject of the rhyming slang fairly and explicitly other than by
means of this note.—EDITOR.


FOOTNOTES:

[61] This was written in 1858.

[62] The famous printers and publishers of sheet songs and last dying
speeches thirty years ago.

[63] The writer, a street chaunter of ballads and last dying speeches,
alludes in his letter to two celebrated criminals—Thos. Drory, the
murderer of Jael Denny, and Sarah Chesham, who poisoned her husband,
accounts of whose trials and “horrid deeds” he had been selling. Here is
a Glossary of the cant words:—

_Thick un_, a sovereign.

_Dowry of Parny_, a lot of rain.

_Stumped_, bankrupt.

_Bossman_, a farmer.

  ⁂ Drory was a farmer.

_Patter_, trial.

_Tops_, last dying speeches.

_Dies_, _ib._

_Croaks_, _ib._

_Burick_, a woman.

_Topped_, hung.

_Sturaban_, a prison.

_James_, a sovereign.

_Clye_, a pocket.

_Carser_, a house or residence.

_Speel on the Drum_, to be off to the country.

_All Square_, all right, or quite well.




GLOSSARY OF THE RHYMING SLANG.


~Abraham’s willing~, a shilling.

~Allacompain~, rain.

~Any racket~, a penny faggot.

~Apples and pears~, stairs.

~Artful dodger~, a lodger.

~Baby’s pap~, a cap.

~Barnet fair~, hair.

~Battle of the Nile~, a tile—vulgar term for a hat. “Cool his BATTLE,
Bill.”

~Ben flake~, a steak.

~Billy Button~, mutton.

~Birch-broom~, a room.

~Bird-lime~, time.

~Bob, my pal~, a gal,—vulgar pronunciation of girl.

~Bonnets so blue~, Irish stew.

~Bottle of spruce~, a deuce,—slang for twopence.

~Bowl the hoop~, soup.

~Brian o’Linn~, gin.

~Brown Bess~, yes—the affirmative.

~Brown Joe~, no—the negative.

~Bull and cow~, a row.

~Bucket afloat~, a coat. This is also called I’m AFLOAT, and is
generally contracted to “cool his Imer,” or “nark his bucket.” There is
no necessity to particularize all contractions. With the key already
given they will be evident.

~Bullock’s horn~, in pawn.

~Bushy-park~, a lark.

~Butter flap~, a trap, a light cart.

~Cain and Abel~, a table.

~Camden-town~, a brown,—vulgar term for a halfpenny.

~Castle rag~, a flag,—cant term for fourpence.

~Cat and mouse~, a house.

~Chalk farm~, the arm.

~Charing Cross~, a horse.

~Charley Lancaster~, a handkercher,—vulgar pronunciation of
handkerchief.

~Charley Prescott~, a waistcoat.

~Cherry ripe~, a pipe.

~Chevy chase~, the face.

~Chump~ (or CHUNK) ~of wood~, no good.

~Covent Garden~, a farden,—Cockney pronunciation of farthing.

~Cow and calf~, to laugh.

~Cows and kisses~, mistress or missus—referring to the ladies.

~Currants and plums~, thrums,—slang for threepence.

~Daisy roots~, a pair of boots.

~Dan Tucker~, butter.

~Ding-dong~, a song.

~Dry land~, you understand.

~Duke of York~, walk, or talk, according to context.

~East and south~, the mouth.

~Eat a fig~, to “crack a crib,” to break into a house, or commit a
burglary.

~Egyptian hall~, a ball.

~Elephant’s trunk~, drunk.

~Epsom races~, a pair of braces.

~Everton toffee~, coffee.

~Field of wheat~, a street.

~Fillet of veal~, the treadwheel in the house of correction.

~Finger and thumb~, rum.

~Flag unfurled~, a man of the world.

~Flea and louse~, a house.

~Flounder and dab~ (two kinds of flat fish), a cab.

~Fly my kite~, a light.

~Frog and toad~, the main road.

~Garden gate~, a magistrate.

~German flutes~, a pair of boots.

~Girl and boy~, a saveloy,—a penny sausage.

~Glorious sinner~, a dinner.

~Gooseberry pudding~ (_vulgo_ PUDDEN), a woman.

~Harry Bluff~, snuff.

~Hod of mortar~, a pot of porter.

~Hounslow Heath~, teeth.

~I desire~, a fire.

~I’m afloat~, a boat. This is also used for coat. _See ante._

~Isabeller~ (vulgar pronunciation of ISABELLA), an umbrella.

~Isle of France~, a dance.

~I suppose~, the nose.

~Jack-a-dandy~, brandy.

~Jack Randall~ (a noted pugilist), a candle.

~Jenny Linder~, a winder,—vulgar pronunciation of window.

~Joe Savage~, a cabbage.

~Lath and plaster~, a master.

~Lean and lurch~, a church.

~Lean and fat~, a hat.

~Linendraper~, paper.

~Live eels~, fields.

~Load of hay~, a day.

~Long acre~, a baker.

~Lord John Russell~, a bustle.

~Lord Lovel~, a shovel.

~Lump of coke~, a bloke—vulgar term for a man.

~Lump of lead~, the head.

~Macaroni~, a pony.

~Maids adorning~, the morning.

~Maidstone jailer~, a tailor.

~Mince pies~, the eyes.

~Mother and daughter~, water.

~Muffin baker~, a Quaker (slang term for excrement).

~Navigators~, taturs,—vulgar pronunciation of potatoes.

~Navigator Scot~, baked potatoes all hot.

~Needle and thread~, bread.

~Never fear~, beer.

~Night and day~, the play.

~Nose and chin~, a winn,—ancient cant for a penny.

~Noser my knacker~, tobacco.

~Oats and barley~, Charley.

~Oats and chaff~, a footpath.

~Orinoko~ (pronounced ORINOKER), a poker.

~Over the stile~, sent for trial.

~Paddy Quick~, thick, or a stick.

~Pen and ink~, a stink.

~Pitch and fill~, Bill,—vulgar shortening for William.

~Plates of meat~, the feet.

~Plough the deep~, to go to sleep.

~Pope o’ Rome~, home.

~Read and write~, to fight.

~River Lea~, tea.

~Rogue and villain~, a shillin,—common pronunciation of shilling.

~Roll me in the dirt~, a shirt.

~Rory o’More~, the floor. Also used to signify a whore.

~Round the houses~, trousies,—vulgar pronunciation of trousers.

~Salmon and trout~, the mouth.

~Scotch Peg~, a leg.

~Ship in full sail~, a pot of ale.

~Sir Walter Scott~, a pot,—generally of beer.

~Snake in the grass~, a looking-glass.

~Sorrowful tale~, three months in jail.

~Split asunder~, a costermonger.

~Steam-packet~, a jacket.

~St. Martin’s-le-Grand~, the hand.

~Stop thief~, beef.

~Sugar and honey~, money.

~Sugar-candy~, brandy.

~Take a fright~, night.

~Three-quarters of a peck~, the neck,—in writing, among experts,
expressed by the simple “3/4,” as it is pronounced.

~Tom Tug~, a mug (a fool).

~Tommy o’Rann~, scran,—vulgar term for food.

~Tommy Tripe~, to pipe; that is, to observe. “Tommy Tripe his plates of
meat.”

~Top Jint~ (vulgar pronunciation of joint), a pint—of beer.

~Turtle doves~, a pair of gloves.

~Two-foot rule~, a fool.

And so on as occasion requires.




CENTRE SLANG.


Within the past few years the desire to possess a mode of
intercommunication which shall be incomprehensible to those who have not
taken their degrees in vice, has led the dangerous classes—particularly
street-muggers, welchers, skittle-sharps, jerry-hunters, and the various
other gentlemen who turn out every morning, when not in charge of the
powers that be, to look for their livings—to give their attention to
another twist in the English language, and so centre slang has of late
been heard with some degree of frequency by those who penetrate to
places where there is a likelihood of finding anything new, and take
with them sufficient knowledge to comprehend it when, or if, it is
found. As this knowledge can never be acquired in any other way than by
actual observation, and is not to be obtained by hearsay, or second-hand
information, or from books, it is rarely brought to bear upon any
subject of this kind as treated in the newspapers, and the articles on
real low and criminal life which now and again appear, though extremely
amusing, amuse those about whom they are written as much as they do
those for whose information they are produced. So, perhaps, those
writers who have heard centre slang, and have had opportunity of
referring to it, did not know what it was, or certainly, as an
institution unique in its way, it would have received some little
attention. There is not much in it, of course, as its origin shows, the
key being everything towards success in experimentalizing with it.
Centre slang, then, is formed by making the central vowel of a word its
initial letter, and adding vowels and consonants sufficient to make the
sound imposing, or, as cooks say, to flavour palatably. An occasional
infusion of back slang is now and again considered advisable, but the
taste of the speaker must decide how much is requisite. Mug is a common
word to signify a fool or flat; this, in centre slang, becomes Ugmer, or
Hugmer, as the speaker likes, while fool and flat themselves become
Oolerfer and Atfler respectively. The aspirate can be added, if
relished, to any centre slang word. A welcher, by means of the new
slang, becomes an Elcherwer or Elchwer, a thief is an Evethee, and a
sticker-up of skittles is an Ickitser-pu. As the inventors of this slang
are not particular about spelling, phonography is used extensively in
its composition—that is, it would be, if it were possible to write
centre slang to any extent. However, as it is a spoken language only,
and no patent has been taken out for its use, boldness is the chief
essential for any one possessed of a mobile tongue and a desire to
become expert. There is no Glossary of this slang necessary, as it is
only made up of small parcels, as occasion requires, and does not keep
well without guiding sentences attached.




THE BIBLIOGRAPHY

OF

SLANG, CANT, AND VULGAR LANGUAGE:

A LIST OF THE

BOOKS CONSULTED IN COMPILING THIS WORK.


Slang has a literary history, the same as authorized language. More than
one hundred works have treated upon the subject in one form or other,—a
few devoting but a chapter, whilst many have given up their entire pages
to expounding its history and use. Old Harman, a worthy man, who
interested himself in suppressing and exposing vagabondism in the days
of good Queen Bess, was the first to write upon the subject. Decker
followed fifty years afterwards, but helped himself, evidently, to his
predecessor’s labours. Shakspeare, Beaumont and Fletcher, Ben Jonson,
and Brome, each employed beggars’ cant as part of the machinery of their
plays. Then came Head (who wrote _The English Rogue_ in 1680) with a
Glossary of cant words “used by the Gipsies.” But it was only a reprint
of what Decker had given sixty years before. About this time authorized
dictionaries began to insert vulgar words, labelling them “cant.” The
Jack Sheppards and Dick Turpins of the early and middle part of the last
century made cant popular, and many small works were published upon the
subject. But it was Grose, burly, facetious Grose, who, in the year
1785, collected the scattered Glossaries of cant and secret words, and
formed one large work, adding to it all the vulgar words and slang terms
used in his own day. The indelicacy and extreme vulgarity of the work
renders it unfit for ordinary use, still it must be admitted that it is
by far the most important work which has ever appeared on street or
popular language; indeed, from its pages every succeeding work has, up
to the present time, drawn its contents. The great fault of Grose’s book
consists in the author not contenting himself with slang and cant terms,
but inserting every “smutty” and offensive word that could be
discovered. However, Harman and Grose are, after all, the only authors
who have as yet treated the subject in an original manner, or who have
written on it from personal inquiry.


~Ainsworth’s~ (William Harrison) Novels and Ballads.     _London_, V. D.

Some of this author’s novels, such as _Rookwood_ and _Jack Sheppard_,
abound in Cant words, placed in the mouths of the highwaymen. The
author’s ballads (especially “Nix my dolly, pals, fake away”) have long
been popular favourites.

~Amorous Gallants’ Tongue tipp’d with Golden Expressions;~ or the Art of
Courtship refined, being the best and Newest ACADEMY; containing Select
Sentences, forms of Courtship; Choice Letters; Interpretation of Dreams:
to which is added Bills, Bonds, Releases, Letters of Attorney, &c.;
together with _A Canting Academy_, or the PEDLAR’S FRENCH DICTIONARY,
13th edition. London, for C. Hitch and L. Hawes, n. d. [1740], 12mo.

~A New Dictionary of the Jaunting Crew~, 12mo.      N. D.

Mentioned by John Bee in the Introduction to his _Sportsman’s Slang
Dictionary_.

~Andrews’~ (George) Dictionary of the Slang and Cant Languages, Ancient
and Modern, 12mo. _London_, 1809.

A sixpenny pamphlet, with a coloured frontispiece representing a
beggar’s carnival.

~Ash’s~ (John, LL.D.) New and Complete Dictionary of the English
Language, 2 vols. 8vo.      1775.

Contains a great number of Cant words and phrases.

~Bacchus and Venus;~ or, A Select Collection of near Two Hundred of the
most Witty and Diverting Songs and Catches in Love and Gallantry, with
Songs in the Canting Dialect, with a DICTIONARY _explaining all
Burlesque and Canting Terms_, 12mo.      1738.

Prefixed is a curious woodcut frontispiece of a _Boozing-Ken_. This work
is scarce, and much prized by collectors. The Canting Dictionary
appeared before, about 1710, with the initials B. E. on the title. It
also came out afterwards, in the year 1751, under the title of the
_Scoundrel’s Dictionary_,—a mere reprint of the two former impressions.

~Bailey’s~ (Nath.) Etymological English Dictionary, 2 vols. 8vo.   1737.

Contains a great many Cant and Vulgar Words;—indeed, Bailey does not
appear to have been very particular what words he inserted, so long as
they were actually in use. _A Collection of Ancient and Modern Cant
Words_ appears as an appendix to vol. ii. of this edition (third).

~Bang-up Dictionary;~ or, the Lounger and Sportsman’s Vade-Mecum,
containing a copious and correct Glossary of the Language of the Whips,
illustrated by a great variety of original and curious Anecdotes,
8vo.      1812.

A vulgar performance, consisting of pilferings from Grose, and made up
with meanings of a degraded character.

~Bartlett’s~ Dictionary of Americanisms; a Glossary of Words and Phrases
colloquially used in the United States, 8vo.      _New York_, 1859.

It is a curious fact connected with slang that a great number of vulgar
words common in England are equally common in the United States; and
when we remember that America began to be peopled two centuries ago, and
that these colloquialisms must have crossed the sea with the first
emigrants, we can form some idea of the antiquity of popular or street
language. Many words, owing to the caprices of fashion or society, have
wholly disappeared in the parent country, whilst in the colonies they
are yet heard. The words “skink,” to serve drink in company, and the old
term “miching” or “meeching,” skulking or playing truant, for instance,
are still in use in the United States, although nearly obsolete here.

~Beaumont and Fletcher’s~ Comedy of _The Beggar’s Bush_, 4to, 1661.

Contains numerous Cant words.

~Bee’s~ (Jon.) Dictionary of the Turf, the Ring, the Chase, the Pit, the
Bon Ton, and the Varieties of Life, forming the completest and most
authentic Lexicon Balatronicum hitherto offered to the notice of the
Sporting World, by John Bee [_i.e._, John Badcock], Editor of the
_Fancy_, _Fancy Gazette_, _Living Picture of London_, and the like of
that, 12mo.      1823.

This author published books on Stable Economy under the name of Hinds.
He was the sporting rival of Pierce Egan. Professor Wilson, in an
amusing article in _Blackwood’s Magazine_, reviewed this work.

~Bee’s~ (Jon.) Living Picture of London for 1828, and Stranger’s Guide
through the Streets of the Metropolis; showing the Frauds, the Arts,
Snares, and Wiles of all descriptions of Rogues that everywhere abound,
12mo.      1828.

Professes to be a guide to society, high and low, in London, and to give
an insight into the language of the streets.

~Bee’s~ (Jon.) Sportsman’s Slang; a New Dictionary of Terms used in the
Affairs of the Turf, the Ring, the Chase, and the Cockpit; with those of
Bon Ton and the Varieties of Life, forming a _Lexicon Balatronicum et
Macaronicum_, &c., 12mo, PLATE. _For the Author_,      1825.

The same as the preceding, only with an altered title. Both wretched
performances, filled with miserable attempts at wit.

~Blackguardiana;~ or, Dictionary of Rogues, Bawds, &c., 8vo, WITH
PORTRAITS [by James Caulfield].      1795.

This work, with a long and very vulgar title, is nothing but a reprint
of Grose, with a few anecdotes of pirates, odd persons, &c., and some
curious portraits inserted. It was concocted by Caulfield as a
speculation, and published at _one guinea_ per copy; and, owing to the
remarkable title, and the notification at the bottom that “only a few
copies were printed,” soon became scarce. For philological purposes it
is not worth so much as any edition of Grose.

~Book of Vagabonds.~ _See_ under LIBER VAGATORUM.

~Boxiana;~ or, Sketches of Modern Pugilism, by Pierce Egan (an account
of the prize-ring), 3 vols. 8vo.      1820.

Gives more particularly the Cant terms of pugilism, but contains
numerous (what were then styled) “flash” words.

~Brandon.~ Poverty, Mendicity, and Crime; or, The Facts, Examinations,
&c., upon which the Report was founded, presented to the House of Lords
by W. A. Miles, Esq., to which is added a Dictionary of the Flash or
Cant Language, known to every Thief and Beggar, edited by H. Brandon,
Esq., 8vo.      1839.

A very wretched performance.

~Brome’s~ (Rich.) Joviall Crew; or, The Merry Beggars. Presented in a
Comedie at the Cockpit, in Drury Lane, in the Year (4to)      1652.

Contains many Cant words similar to those given by Decker,—from whose
works they were doubtless obtained.

~Brown’s~ (Rev. Hugh Stowell) Lecture on Manliness, 12mo.      1857.

Contains a few modern Slang words.

~Brydges’~ (Sir Egerton) British Bibliographer, 4 vols. 8vo.    1810-14.

Vol. ii. p. 521, gives a list of Cant words.

~Bulwer’s~ (Sir Edward Lytton) Paul Clifford.      V. D.

Contains numerous Cant words.

~Bulwer’s~ (Sir Edward Lytton) Pelham.      V. D.

Contains a few Cant terms.

~Butler’s Hudibras~, with Dr. Grey’s Annotations, 3 vols. 8vo.     1819.

Abounding in colloquial terms and phrases.

~Cambridge.~ Gradus ad Cantabrigiam; or, a Dictionary of Terms,
Academical and Colloquial, or Cant, which are used at the University,
_with Illustrations_, 12mo.      _Camb._, 1803.

~Canting:~ A Poem, interspersed with Tales and Additional Scraps, post
8vo.      1814.

A few street words may be gleaned from this rather dull poem.

~Canting Academy:~ or, Villanies Discovered, wherein are shown the
Mysterious and Villanous Practices of that Wicked Crew—Hectors,
Trapanners, Gilts, &c., with several new Catches and Songs; also
Compleat Canting Dictionary, 12mo, _frontispiece_.      1674.

Compiled by Richard Head.

~Canting Dictionary;~ comprehending all the Terms, Antient and Modern,
used in the several Tribes of Gypsies, Beggars, Shoplifters, Highwaymen,
Foot-Pads, and all other Clans of Cheats and Villains, with Proverbs,
Phrases, Figurative Speeches, &c., to which is added a complete
Collection of Songs in the Canting Dialect, 12mo.      1725.

The title is by far the most interesting part of the work. A mere
make-up of earlier attempts.

~Carew.~ Life and Adventures of Bamfylde Moore Carew, the King of the
Beggars, _with Canting Dictionary_, _portrait_, 8vo.      1791.

There are numerous editions of this singular biography. The Canting
Dictionary is nothing more than a filch from earlier books.

~Characterisms~, or the Modern Age Displayed; being an Attempt to Expose
the Pretended Virtues of Both Sexes, 12mo (part i., Ladies; part ii.,
Gentlemen), _E. Owen_.      1750.

An anonymous work, from which some curious matter may be obtained.

~Conybeare’s~ (Dean) Essay on Church Parties, reprinted from the
_Edinburgh Review_, No. CC., October, 1853, 12mo.      1858.

Several curious instances of religious or pulpit Slang are given in this
exceedingly interesting little volume.

~Corcoron~ (Peter.) The Fancy, a Poem, 12mo.      182-.

Abounding in Slang words and the terms of the prize-ring. Written in
imitation of Moore’s _Tom Crib’s Memorial_, by one of the authors of
_The Rejected Addresses_.

~Cotton’s~ (Charles) Genuine Poetical Works, 12mo.      1771.

“Scarronides, or Virgil Travestie, being the first and fourth Books of
Virgil’s Æneis, in English burlesque,” 8vo, 1672, and other works by
this author, contain numerous vulgar words now known as Slang.

~Decker’s~ (Thomas) The Bellman of London; bringing to light the most
notorious villanies that are now practised in the Kingdom; 4to, black
letter.      _London_, 1608.

Watt says this is the first book which professes to give an account of
the Canting language of thieves and vagabonds. But this is wrong, as
will have been seen from the remarks on Harman, who collected the words
of the vagabond crew half a century before.

~Decker’s~ (Thomas) Lanthorne and Candle-light, or the Bellman’s Second
Night’s Walke, in which he brings to light a brood of more strange
villanies than ever were to this year discovered, 4to. _London_, 1608-9.

This is a continuation of the former work, and contains the _Canter’s
Dictionary_, and has a frontispiece of the London Watchman with his
staff broken.

~Decker’s~ (Thomas) Gull’s Hornbook, 4to.      1609.

“This work affords a greater insight into the fashionable follies and
vulgar habits of Queen Elizabeth’s day than perhaps any other extant.”

~Decker’s~ (Thomas) O per se O, or a new Cryer of Lanthorne and
Candle-light, an Addition of the Bellman’s Second Night’s Walke, 4to,
black letter.      1612.

A lively description of London. Contains a Canter’s Dictionary, every
word in which appears to have been taken from Harman without
acknowledgment. This is the first work that gives the Canting song, a
verse of which is inserted at page 14 of the Introduction. This Canting
song has since been inserted in nearly all dictionaries of Cant.

~Decker’s~ (Thomas) Villanies discovered by Lanthorne and Candle-light,
and the Helpe of a new Cryer called O per se O, 4to.      1616.

“With canting songs never before printed.”

~Decker’s~ (Thomas) English Villanies, eight several times prest to
Death by the Printers, but still reviving again, are now the eighth time
(as at the first) discovered by Lanthorne and Candle-light, &c.,
4to.      1648.

The eighth edition of the _Lanthorne and Candle-light_.

~Dictionary~ of all the Cant and Flash Languages, both Ancient and
Modern, 18mo.      _Bailey_, 1790.

~Dictionary~ of all the Cant and Flash Languages, 12mo.  _London_, 1797.

~Dictionary~ of the Canting Crew (Ancient and Modern), of Gypsies,
Beggars, Thieves, &c., 12mo.      N. D. [1700.]

~Dictionnaire~ des Halle, 12mo.      _Bruxelles_, 1696.

This curious Slang dictionary sold in the Stanley sale for £4 16_s._

~Ducange Anglicus.~—The Vulgar Tongue: comprising Two Glossaries of
Slang, Cant, and Flash Words and Phrases used in London at the present
day, 12mo.      1857.

A silly and childish performance, full of blunders and contradictions.

~Duncombe’s~ Flash Dictionary of the Cant Words, Queer Sayings, and
Crack Terms now in use in Flash Cribb Society, 32mo, _coloured
print_.     1820.

~Dunton’s~ Ladies’ Dictionary, 8vo.      _London_, 1694.

Contains a few Cant and vulgar words.

~Egan.~ Grose’s Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, with the
addition of numerous Slang Phrases, edited by Pierce Egan, 8vo.    1823.

The best edition of Grose, with many additions, including a life of this
celebrated antiquary.

~Egan’s~ (Pierce) Life in London, 2 vols. thick 8vo, _with coloured
plates by Geo. Cruikshank, representing high and low life_.      18—.

Contains numerous Cant, Slang, sporting, and vulgar words, supposed by
the author to form the basis of conversation in life, high and low, in
London.

~Elwyn’s~ (Alfred L.) Glossary of supposed _Americanisms_—Vulgar and
Slang Words used in the United States, small 8vo.      1859.

~Gentleman’s Magazine~, 8vo.      N. D.

“In a very early volume of this parent magazine were given a few pages,
by way of sample, of a Slang vocabulary, then termed Cant. If, as we
suspect, this part of the magazine fell to the share of Dr. Johnson, who
was then its editor, we have to lament that he did not proceed with the
design.”—_John Bee, in the Introduction to his Slang Dictionary_, 1825.

~Gentleman’s Magazine~, vol. xcii., p. 520.

Mention made of Slang.

~Glossaries~ of County Dialects.      V. D.

Many of these will repay examination, as they contain Cant and Slang
words, wrongly inserted as provincial or old terms.

~Golden Cabinet~ (The) of Secrets opened for Youth’s delightful Pastime,
in 7 parts, the last being the “City and Country Jester;” with a Canting
Dictionary, by Dr. Surman, 12mo.      _London_, N. D. (1730.)

Contains some curious woodcuts.

~Greene’s~ (Robert) Notable Discovery of Coosnage, now daily practised
by sundry lewd persons called Conie-catchers and Crosse-biters. Plainly
laying open those pernitious sleights that hath brought many ignorant
men to confusion. Written for the general benefit of all Gentlemen,
Citizens, Apprentices, Country Farmers, and Yeomen, that may hap to fall
into the company of such coosening companions. With a delightful
discourse of the coosnage of Colliers, 4to, _with woodcuts_.    _Printed
by John Wolfe_, 1591.

_The first edition._ A copy of another edition, supposed to be _unique_,
is dated 1592. It was sold at the Heber sale.

~Greene’s~ (Robert) Groundworke of Conny-catching, the manner of their
pedlers’ French, and the meanes to understand the same, with the cunning
sleights of the Counterfeit Cranke. Done by a Justice of the Peace of
great Authoritie, 4to, _with woodcuts_.      1592.

Usually enumerated among Greene’s works, but it is only a reprint, with
variations, of _Harman’s Caveat_, and of which Rowland complains in his
Martin Markall. The _second_ and _third_ parts of this curious work were
published in the same year. Two other very rare volumes by Greene were
published—_The Defence of Cony-Catching_, 4to, in 1592, and THE BLACK
BOOKES MESSENGER, in 1595. They both treat on the same subjects.

~Grose’s~ (Francis, generally styled Captain) Classical Dictionary of
the Vulgar Tongue, 8vo.      178-.

The much-sought-after FIRST EDITION, but containing nothing, as far as I
have examined, which is not to be found in the _second_ and _third_
editions. As respects indecency, I find all the editions equally
disgraceful. The Museum copy of the _first edition_ is, I suspect,
Grose’s own copy, as it contains numerous manuscript additions which
afterwards went to form the second edition. Excepting the obscenities,
it is really an extraordinary book, and displays great industry, if we
cannot speak much of its morality. It is the well from which all the
other authors—Duncombe, Caulfield, Clarke, Egan, &c. &c.—drew their
vulgar outpourings, without in the least purifying what they had stolen.

~Haggart.~ Life of David Haggart, _alias_ John Wilson, _alias_ Barney
M’Coul, written by himself while under sentence of death, curious
frontispiece of the prisoner in irons, intermixed with all the Slang and
Cant words of the day, to which is added a Glossary of the same,
12mo.      1821.

~Hall’s~ (B.H.) Collection of College Words and Customs, 12mo.
_Cambridge (U.S.)_, 1856.

Very complete. The illustrative examples are excellent.

~Halliwell’s~ Archaic Dictionary, 2 vols. 8vo.      1855.

An invaluable work, giving the Cant words used by Decker, Brome, and a
few of those mentioned by Grose.

~Harlequin~ Jack Shepherd, with a Night Scene in Grotesque Characters,
8vo.      (_About_ 1736.)

Contains Songs in the _Canting_ dialect.

~Harman’s~ (Thomas, Esq.) Caveat or Warening for Common Cursetors,
vulgarly called vagabones, set forth for the utilitie and profit of his
naturall countrey, augmented and inlarged by the first author thereof;
whereunto is added the tale of the second taking of the counterfeit
crank, with the true report of his behaviour and also his punishment for
his so dissembling, most marvellous to the hearer or reader thereof,
newly imprinted, 4to.      _Imprinted at London, by H. Middleton_, 1573.

Contains the earliest Dictionary of the Cant language. Four editions
were printed—

  William Griffith, 1566
                    1567
                    1567
  Henry Middleton,  1573

What _Grose’s Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue_ was to the authors of the
earlier part of the present century, Harman’s was to the Deckers, and
Bromes, and Heads of the seventeenth.

~Harrison’s~ (William) Description of the Island of Britain (prefixed to
_Holinshed’s Chronicle_), 2 vols. folio.      1577.

Contains an account of English vagabonds.

~Hazlitt’s~ (William) Table Talk, 12mo, (vol. ii. contains a chapter on
Familiar Style, with a notice on Slang terms.)

~Head’s~ (Richard) English Rogue, described in the Life of Meriton
Latroon, a Witty Extravagant, 4 vols. 12mo.   _Frans. Kirkman_, 1671-80.

Contains a list of Cant words, evidently copied from Decker.

~Hell upon earth~, or the most pleasant and delectable History of
Whittington’s Colledge, otherwise vulgarly called Newgate, 12mo.   1703.

~Henley’s~ (John, better known as ORATOR HENLEY) Various Sermons and
Orations.      1719-53.

Contains numerous vulgarisms and Slang phrases.

[~Hitching’s~ (Charles, formerly City Marshal, now a prisoner in
Newgate)] Regulator; or, a Discovery of the Thieves, Thief-Takers, and
Locks, _alias_ Receivers of Stolen Goods in and about the City of
London; also an account of all the flash words now in vogue amongst the
Thieves, &c., 8vo, very rare, _with a curious woodcut_.      1718.

A violent attack upon Jonathan Wild.

~Household Words~, No. 183, September 24.

Gives an interesting article on Slang, with many examples.

~Johnson’s~ (Dr. Samuel) Dictionary (the earlier editions).      V. D.

Contains a great number of words italicized as _Cant_, low, or
barbarous.

~Jonson’s~ (Ben.) Bartholomew Fair, ii. 6.

Several Cant words are placed in the mouths of the characters.

~Jonson’s~ (Ben.) Masque of the Gipsies Metamorphosed, 4to.      16—.

Contains numerous Cant words.

~Kent’s~ (E.) Modern Flash Dictionary, containing all the Cant words,
Slang Terms, and Flash Phrases now in Vogue, 18mo, _coloured
frontispiece_.      1825.

~L’Estrange’s~ (Sir Roger) Works (principally translations).      V.D.

Abound in vulgar and Slang phrases.

~Lexicon~ Balatronicum; a Dictionary of Buckish Slang, University Wit,
and Pickpocket Eloquence, by a Member of the Whip Club, assisted by
Hell-fire Dick, 8vo.      1811.

One of the many reprints of Grose’s second edition, put forth under a
fresh, and what was then considered a more attractive title. It was
given out in advertisements, &c., as a piece of puff, that it was edited
by a Dr. H. Clarke, but contains scarcely a line more than Grose.

~Liber Vagatorum:~ Der Betler Orden, 4to. Translated into English, with
Notes, by John Camden Hotten, as The Book of Vagabonds and Beggars, with
a vocabulary of their Language (_Rotwelsche Sprach_); edited, with
preface, by Martin Luther, in the year 1528, 4to, _with woodcuts_. 1859.

The first edition of this book appears to have been printed at Augsburg,
by Erhard Oglin, or Ocellus, about 1514,—a small quarto of twelve
leaves. It was frequently reprinted at other places in Germany: and in
1528 there appeared an edition at Wirtemberg, with a preface by Martin
Luther, who says that the “Rotwelsche Sprach,” the Cant language of the
beggars, comes from the Jews, as it contains many Hebrew words, as any
one who understands that language may perceive. This book is divided
into three parts, or sections; the first gives a special account of the
several orders of the “Fraternity of Vagabonds;” the second, sundry
“_notabilia_” relating to the different classes of beggars previously
described; and the third consists of a “Rotwelsche Vocabulary,” or
“Canting Dictionary.” There is a long notice of the “Liber Vagatorum” in
the “Weimarisches Jahrbuch,” 10ter Band, 1856. Mayhew, in his _London
Labour_, states that many of our Cant words are derived from the Jew
fences. It is singular that a similar statement should have been made by
Martin Luther more than three centuries before.

~Life in St. George’s Fields;~ or, The Rambles and Adventures of
Disconsolate William, Esq., and his Surrey Friend, Flash Dick, with
Songs and a FLASH DICTIONARY, 8vo.      1821.

~Maginn~ (Dr.) wrote Slang songs in _Blackwood’s Magazine_.      1827.

~Mayhew’s~ (Henry) London Labour and the London Poor, 4 vols.   1851-61.

An invaluable work to the inquirer into popular or street language.

~Mayhew’s~ (Henry) Great World of London, 8vo.      1857.

An unfinished work, but containing several examples of the use and
application of Cant and Slang words.

~Middleton~ (Thomas) and ~Decker’s~ (Thomas) Roaring Girl; or Moll Cut
Purse, 4to.      1611.

The conversation in one scene is entirely in the so-called pedlar’s
French. It is given in _Dodsley’s Old Plays_.

~Modern Flash Dictionary~, 48mo.      1825.

The smallest Slang dictionary ever printed; intended for the
waistcoat-pockets of the “BLOODS” of the Prince Regent’s time.

~Moncrieff’s~ Tom and Jerry, or Life in London, a Farce in Three Acts,
12mo.      1820.

An excellent exponent of the false and forced “high life” which was so
popular during the minority of George IV. The farce had a run of a
hundred nights, or more, and was a general favourite for years. It
abounds in Cant, and the language of “gig,” as it was then often termed.

Mornings at Bow Street, by T. Wright, 12mo, _with Illustrations by
George Cruikshank_. _Tegg_,      1838.

In this work a few etymologies of Slang words are attempted.

New Canting Dictionary, 12mo.      N. D.

A copy of this work is described in _Rodd’s Catalogue of Elegant
Literature_, 1845, part iv., No. 2128, with manuscript notes and
additions in the autograph of Isaac Reed, price £1. 8_s._

~New Dictionary~ of the Terms, Ancient and Modern, of the Canting Crew
in its several tribes of Gypsies, Beggars, Thieves, Cheats, &c., with an
addition of some _Proverbs, Phrases, Figurative Speeches, &c._, by
B. E., GENT., 12mo.      N. D. [1710.]

Afterwards issued under the title of _Bacchus and Venus_, 1737, and in
1754 as the _Scoundrel’s Dictionary_.

~New Dictionary~ of all the Cant and Flash Languages used by every class
of offenders, from a Lully Prigger to a High Tober Gloak, small 8vo, pp.
62.      179-.

Mentioned by John Bee.

~Notes and Queries.~ The invaluable Index to this most useful periodical
may be consulted with advantage by the seeker after etymologies of Slang
and Cant words.

~Parker.~ High and Low Life, A View of Society in, being the Adventures
in England, Ireland, &c., of Mr. G. Parker, _A Stage Itinerant_, 2 vols.
in 1, thick 12mo.      _Printed for the Author_, 1781.

A curious work, containing many Cant words, with 100 orders of rogues
and swindlers.

~Parker’s~ (Geo.) Life’s Painter of Variegated Characters, with a
Dictionary of Cant Language and Flash Songs, to which is added a
Dissertation on Freemasonry, _portrait_, 8vo.      1789.

~Pegge’s~ (Samuel) Anecdotes of the English Language, chiefly regarding
the Local Dialect of London and Environs, 8vo.      1803-41.

~Perry’s~ (William) London Guide and Stranger’s Safeguard against
Cheats, Swindlers, and Pickpockets, by a Gentleman who has made the
Police of the Metropolis an object of inquiry twenty-two years (no
wonder when the author was in prison a good portion of that time!) 1818.

Contains a dictionary of Slang and Cant words.

~Phillip’s~ New World of Words, folio.      1696.

~Pickering’s~ (F.) Vocabulary, or Collection of Words and Phrases which
have been supposed to be peculiar to the United States of America, to
which is prefixed an Essay on the present state of the English Language
in the United States, 8vo.      _Boston_, 1816.

The remark made upon _Bartlett’s Americanisms_ applies equally to this
work.

~Picture of the Fancy~, 12mo.      18—.

Contains numerous Slang terms.

~Potter’s~ (H. T., of _Clay, Worcestershire_) New Dictionary of all the
Cant and Flash Languages, both ancient and modern, 8vo, pp. 62.    1790.

~Poulter.~ The Discoveries of John Poulter, _alias_ Baxter, 8vo, 48
pages.      (1770?)

At pages 42, 43, there is an explanation of the “Language of Thieves,
commonly called Cant.”

~Prison-breaker~, The, or the Adventures of John Sheppard, a Farce,
8vo.      _London_, 1725.

Contains a Canting song, &c.

~Punch~, or the London Charivari.

Often points out Slang, vulgar, or abused words. It also occasionally
employs them in jokes or sketches of character.

~Quarterly Review~, vol. x. p. 528.

Gives a paper on Americanisms and Slang phrases.

~Randall’s~ (Jack, the Pugilist, formerly of the “Hole in the Wall,”
Chancery Lane) Diary of Proceedings at the House of Call for Genius,
edited by Mr. Breakwindow, to which are added several of Mr. B.’s minor
pieces, 12mo.      1820.

Believed to have been written by Thomas Moore. The verses are mostly
parodies of popular authors, and abound in the Slang of pugilism, and
the phraseology of the fast life of the period.

~Randall~ (Jack), a Few Selections from his Scrap-book; to which are
added Poems on the late Fight for the Championship, 12mo.      1822.

Frequently quoted by Moore in _Tom Crib’s Memorial_.

~Scoundrel’s Dictionary;~ or, an Explanation of the Cant Words used by
Thieves, Housebreakers, Street-robbers, and Pickpockets about Town, with
some curious Dissertations on the Art of Wheedling, &c., the whole
printed from a copy taken on one of their gang, in the late scuffle
between the watchman and a party of them on Clerkenwell Green,
8vo.      1754.

A reprint of _Bacchus and Venus_, 1737.

~Sharp~ (Jeremy), The Life of an English Rogue, 12mo.      1740.

Includes a “Vocabulary of the Gypsies’ Cant.”

~Sherwood’s~ Gazetteer of Georgia, U.S., 8vo.

Contains a glossary of words, Slang and vulgar, peculiar to the Southern
States.

~Smith~ (Capt. Alexander), The Thieves’ Grammar, 12mo, p. 28.       17—.

A copy of this work is in the collection formed by Prince Lucien
Bonaparte.

~Smith’s~ (Capt.) Compleat History of the Lives and Robberies of the
most Notorious Highwaymen, Footpads, Shoplifters, and Cheats, of both
Sexes, in and about London and Westminster, 12mo, vol. i.      1719.

This volume contains “The Thieves’ New Canting Dictionary of the Words,
_Proverbs, &c., used by Thieves_.”

~Smith’s~ (Capt.) Thieves’ Dictionary, 12mo.      1724.

~Snowden’s~ Magistrate’s Assistant, and Constable’s Guide, thick small
8vo.      1852.

Gives a description of the various orders of cadgers, beggars, and
swindlers, together with a Glossary of the Flash Language.

~Sportsman’s Dictionary~, 4to.      17—.

By an anonymous author. Contains some low sporting terms.

~Stanley’s~ Remedy, or the Way how to Reform Wandring Beggars, Thieves,
&c., wherein is shewed that Sodomes Sin of Idleness is the Poverty and
the Misery of this Kingdome, 4to.      1646.

This work has an engraving on wood which is said to be the veritable
original of Jim Crow.

~Swift’s~ coarser pieces abound in vulgarities and Slang expressions.

~The Triumph of Wit~, or Ingenuity displayed in its Perfection, being
the Newest and most Useful Academy, Songs, Art of Love, and the Mystery
and Art of Canting, with Poems, Songs, &c., in the Canting Language,
16mo.      _J. Clarke_, 1735.

What is generally termed a shilling _Chap Book_.

~The Triumph of Wit~, or the Canting Dictionary, being the Newest and
most Useful Academy, containing the Mystery and art of Canting, with the
original and present management thereof, and the ends to which it serves
and is employed, illustrated with Poems, Songs, and various Intrigues in
the Canting Language, with the Explanations, &c., 12mo.  _Dublin_, N. D.

A Chap Book of 32 pages, _circa_ 1760.

~The Whole Art Of Thieving~ and Defrauding Discovered: being a Caution
to all Housekeepers, Shopkeepers, Salesmen, and others, to guard against
Robbers of both Sexes, and the best Methods to prevent their Villanies;
to which is added an Explanation of most of the Cant terms in the
Thieving Language, 8vo, pp. 46.      1786.

~Thomas~ (I.), My Thought Book, 8vo.      1825.

Contains a chapter on Slang.

~Tom Crib’s~ Memorial to Congress, with a Preface, Notes, and Appendix
by one of the Fancy [Tom Moore, the Poet], 12mo.      1819.

A humorous poem, abounding in Slang and pugilistic term, with a
burlesque essay on the classic origin of Slang.

~Vacabondes~, the Fraternatye of, as well as of ruflyng Vacabones, as of
beggerly, of Women as of Men, of Gyrles as of Boyes, with their proper
Names and Qualities, with a Description of the Crafty Company of
Cousoners and Shifters, also the XXV. Orders of Knaves; otherwyse called
a Quartern of Knaves, confirmed by Cocke Lorell, 8vo. Imprinted at
London by John Awdeley, dwellyng in little Britayne strete, without
Aldersgate. 1575.

It is stated in _Ames’ Typog. Antiq._, vol. ii. p. 885, that an edition
bearing the date 1565 is in existence, and that the compiler was no
other than old John Audley, the printer, himself. This conjecture,
however, is very doubtful. As stated by Watt, it is more than probable
that it was written by Harman, or was taken from his works, in MS. or
print.

~Vaux’s~ (Count de, a swindler and pickpocket) Life, written by himself,
2 vols., 12mo, to which is added a Canting Dictionary.      1819.

These Memoirs were suppressed on account of the scandalous passages
contained in them.

~Webster’s~ (Noah) Letter to the Hon. John Pickering, on the Subject of
his Vocabulary, or Collection of Words and Phrases supposed to be
peculiar to the United States, 8vo, pp. 69.      _Boston_, 1817.

~Wild~ (Jonathan), History of the Lives and Actions of Jonathan Wild,
Thieftaker, Joseph Blake, _alias_ Blueskin, Footpad, and John Sheppard,
Housebreaker; together with a Canting Dictionary by Jonathan Wild,
_woodcuts_, 12mo.      1750.

~Wilson~ (Professor), contributed various Slang pieces to _Blackwood’s
Magazine_; including a Review of Bee’s Dictionary.

~Witherspoon’s~ (Dr., of America,) Essays on Americanisms, Perversions
of Language in the United States, Cant phrases, &c., 8vo, in the 4th
vol. of his works.      _Philadelphia_, 1801.

The earliest work on American vulgarisms. Originally published as a
series of Essays, entitled the _Druid_, which appeared in a periodical
in 1761.


BALLANTYNE & COMPANY LTD

TAVISTOCK STREET COVENT GARDEN

LONDON




DICTIONARIES


    THE READER’S HANDBOOK OF ALLUSIONS, REFERENCES, PLOTS, AND STORIES.
    By the Rev. E. C. BREWER, LL.D. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s 6d net.

    A DICTIONARY OF MIRACLES: Imitative, Realistic, and Dogmatic. By the
    Rev. E. C. BREWER, LL.D. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s 6d net.

    WORDS, FACTS, AND PHRASES: A Dictionary of Curious, Quaint, and Odd
    Matters. By ELIEZER EDWARDS. Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s 6d.

    FAMILIAR SHORT SAYINGS OF GREAT MEN: with Historical and Explanatory
    Notes. By SAMUEL A. BENT, A.M. Crown 8vo, cloth, 7s 6d.

    FAMILIAR ALLUSIONS. By WILLIAM A. and CHARLES J. WHEELER. Demy 8vo,
    cloth, 7s 6d net.

    THE SLANG DICTIONARY: Etymological, Historical, and Anecdotal. Crown
    8vo, cloth, 6s 6d.

    A DICTIONARY OF THE DRAMA. By W. DAVENPORT ADAMS. Vol. I (A to G).
    Demy 8vo, cloth, 10s 6d net.

London: CHATTO & WINDUS, 111 St. Martin’s Lane, W.C.


       *       *       *       *       *


Transcriber’s Note:

An advertisement for dictionaries has been moved from the beginning of
the text to the end.


The following are used inconsistently in the text:

banknote and bank-note

battles and battells

big-bird and big bird

blackguard and black-guard

boatrace and boat-race

Boozingken and Boozing-Ken

bow-Catcher and bowcatcher

brother-chip and brother-chip

Bubble-and-Squeak and Bubble and Squeak

chamberpot and chamber-pot

cherry-colour and cherry colour

chuck up and chuck-up

coalheaver and coal-heaver

cockshy and cock-shy

cocoanuts and cocoa-nuts

comb cut and comb-cut

coon and ’coon

corner men and corner-men

crabshells and crab shells

cutpurse and cut-purse

daylights and day-light

dead-heat and dead heat

dolly shop and dolly-shop

dunnyken and dunna-ken

everyday and every-day

fagot and faggot

fawney bouncing and fawney-bouncing

fyebuck and fye-buck

halfpence and half-pence

horse chaunter and horse-chaunter

housebreaking and house-breaking

kin-the-lamb and kin the lamb

knobstick and knob-stick

lovelock and love-lock

M. B. and M.B.

M. T. and M.T.

Merry Dun of Dover and merry dun of Dover

mountain pecker and mountain-pecker

necktie and neck-tie

newcomers and new-comers

now-a-days and nowadays

outdoor and out-door

overbearing and over-bearing

overnight and over-night

overreach and over-reach

P. P. and P.P.

parney and parny

percentages and per-centages

pillbox and pill-box

playhouse and play-house

purseproud and purse-proud

racehorse and race-horse

randem and random

reach me downs and reach-me-downs

ringdropping and ring-dropping

schofel and schoful

schoolboys and school-boys

seaport and sea-port

secondhand and second-hand

signpost and sign-post

Soft-soap and soft soap

speechmaking and speech-making

turncoat and turn-coat

turnout and turn-out

W. P. and W.P.

water-bewitched and water bewitched

watercloset and water-closet

wideawake and wide-awake


The following errors in the printed text have been corrected:

advertisement “W.,” changed to “W.”

advertisement “A to G)” changed to “(A to G)”

p. 15 “Bcck” changed to “Beck”

p. 17 “coined money” changed to “coined money.”

p. 29 “‘cribs’’” changed to “‘cribs’””

p. 41 “_Tam O’ Shanter_.”” changed to “_Tam O’ Shanter_.”

p. 68 “on’t—” changed to “on’t”—”

p. 74 “appearance” changed to “appearance.”

p. 74 “I Cor.” changed to “1 Cor.”

p. 82 “Dr” changed to “Dr.”

p. 83 “under-raduates” changed to “under-graduates”

p. 88 “BLUHEN” changed to “BLÜHEN”

p. 89 “ἄσπρόν” changed to “ἄσπρον”

p. 90 “the new police” changed to “the new police.”

p. 91 “belong to you” changed to “belong to you.”

p. 94 “Spit-curl,”” changed to “Spit-curl,”

p. 97 “Rothwalsch” changed to “Rothwälsch”

p. 97 “good fellow;” changed to “good fellow;””

p. 98 “at races” changed to “at races.”

p. 101 “large thick,” changed to “large, thick,”

p. 106 “tumble up,” changed to “tumble up”

p. 107 “contruction” changed to “contraction”

p. 111 “ny temporary” changed to “any temporary”

p. 114 “pay.—ED” changed to “pay.—ED.”

p. 115 “CHEESE your barrikin,”” changed to ““CHEESE your barrikin,””

p. 116 “Derivation obvious” changed to “Derivation obvious.”

p. 118 “and waistcoat” changed to “and waistcoat.”

p. 120 “first-rate” changed to “first-rate.”

p. 128 “Κορινθίαζ εσθαι” changed to “Κορινθιάζεσθαι”

p. 135 “Very often” changed to ““Very often”

p. 136 “Culloden;*” changed to “Culloden;”

p. 137 “CUT ONE’S” CHANGED TO ““CUT ONE’S”

p. 139 “interrupted Julian” changed to “interrupted Julian,”

P. 141 “SO LOOK OUT”” CHANGED TO “SO LOOK OUT.””

P. 152 “MEDIOCITY” CHANGED TO “MEDIOCRITY”

P. 161 “O FOURTEEN” CHANGED TO “OF FOURTEEN”

P. 168 ““OR IN BAD” CHANGED TO “OR “IN BAD”

P. 171 “FULLY committed for trial.” changed to “FULLY committed for
trial.””

p. 176 “crush hat” changed to “crush hat.”

p. 178 “by schoolboys” changed to “by schoolboys.”

p. 188 “unthinking” changed to “unthinking.”

p. 189 “~Harry-soph~” changed to “~Harry-soph~,”

p. 197 “Umh!” changed to ““Umh!”

p. 209 “_Gloucestershire_.” changed to “_Gloucestershire_,”

p. 217 “of the door,’” changed to “of the door,””

p. 219 “nothing five” changed to “nothing: five”

p. 224 “what a MEASLEY” changed to ““what a MEASLEY”

p. 229 “bad MOUNT.” changed to “bad MOUNT.””

p. 232 “_Neptune’s Triumph_, whch” changed to “_Neptune’s Triumph_,
which”

p. 233 “Shakspear ehas” changed to “Shakspeare has”

p. 234 “VAMOS.”” changed to “VAMOS.”

p. 236 ““Your NIBS,” yourself.”” changed to ““Your NIBS,” yourself.”

p. 237 “~Nix my dolly~once” changed to “~Nix my dolly~, once”

p. 243 “_i.e._, you” changed to “_i.e._, “you”

p. 247 “to the PARTY?”” changed to “to the PARTY?”

p. 247 “_Stephano._” changed to ““_Stephano._”

p. 250 “drive awa ;” changed to “drive away;”

p. 251 “Nor yet a single” changed to ““Nor yet a single”

p. 253 “dérobé”).” changed to “dérobé)”.”

p. 253 “English word” changed to “English word.”

p. 254 “its purity?” changed to “its purity?””

p. 254 “trrdesman” changed to “tradesman”

p. 256 “£100,0000,” changed to “£100,000,”

p. 258 “~Pops ~,pocket-pistols.” changed to “~Pops~, pocket-pistols.”

p. 264 “THICK UN a” changed to “THICK UN, a”

p. 265 “for the account”” changed to “for the account.””

p. 275 “in unproductive” changed to “an unproductive”

p. 285 “improvemennts” changed to “improvements”

p. 295 “voilently” changed to “violently”

p. 296 “a good beating,” changed to “a good beating.”

p. 297 “Sluieing” changed to “Sluicing”

p. 297 “tip-top nation.” changed to “tip-top nation.””

p. 299 “SNIDE ’UN.”” changed to “SNIDE ’UN.”

p. 304 “a person, to cease” changed to “a person,” to cease”

p. 305 “TEA-SPOON,” changed to “TEA-SPOON;”

p. 306 “prisoners, when,” changed to “prisoners, when”

p. 307 “~Stab-rag~” changed to “~Stab-rag~,”

p. 316 “first six months” changed to “first six months;”

p. 321 “that term” changed to “that term.”

p. 322 “upon TICKET.” changed to “upon TICKET.””

p. 331 “TWIG,’” changed to “TWIG,””

p. 334 “can you” changed to ““can you”

p. 338 “WORRIT, ro” changed to “or WORRIT,”

p. 334 “igin hougour” changed to “igin agan hougour”

p. 334 “Romany!” changed to “Romany?”

p. 340 “WHITE WINE.”” changed to “WHITE WINE.’””

p. 349 “end with two vowels” changed to “end with two consonants”

p. 354 “~Exis yanneps~xpence.” changed to “~Exis yanneps~, sixpence.”

p. 354 “an apple” changed to “an apple.”

p. 368 “of beer” changed to “of beer.”

p. 369 “centre slang, then,” changed to “Centre slang, then,”

p. 372 “_London_, 1809” changed to “_London_, 1809.”

p. 374 “part of the work” changed to “part of the work.”

p. 374 “attemp” changed to “attempts.”

p. 375 “1858” changed to “1858.”

p. 376 “1797” changed to “1797.”

p. 378 “1859” changed to “1859.”

p. 379 “Wiemarisches” changed to “Weimarisches”

p. 379 “10te” changed to “10ter”


Inconsistent use of small capitals and italics has been left as printed.

On p. 76, “will about win” has been left as printed.

On p. 121, “_See_ COAL” in the entry for “Coal” has been left as
printed.

On p. 195, “the blue jackets wont” has been left as printed.

On p. 379, “Wirtemberg” has been left as printed.


The following were not clearly printed and are conjectural:

Footnote to p. 53 “most objectionable”

p. 90 full stop in “Bethnal Green Museum.”

p. 94 the letter p in “person who steals”

p. 94 bracketed text in “swindler[, or a] lie”

p. 114 bracketed text in “Ch[aw] over”

p. 158 comma in  “unfeminine accomplishment,”

p. 164 letter n and comma in “~Flim-flamn~,”

p. 181 bracketed text in “[tie]d.—_Sea._”

p. 197 last two digits in “1632.”

p. 207 last two digits in “1820.”

p. 211 bracketed text in “so[lic]ited”

p. 243 bracketed text in “descripti[on,]”

p. 248 semi-colon in “POIX);”

p. 262 “to” in “stratagem to excite”

p. 295 comma in “into a man,”

p. 337 comma in “WELSHER,”


There are a number of references to non-existent entries:

the entry for “Briefs” refers to “Reflectors”;

the entry for “Bub” refers to “Bibe”

the entry for “Harum-scarum” refers to “Tandem”;

the entry for “Lucky” refers to “Strike”;

the entry for “Man in the moon” refers to “Election Inquiries”;

the entry for “Random” refers to “Tandem”;

the entry for “Whiddle” refers to “Wheedle”.


In some cases entries of that name exist, but appear to be unrelated:

the entry for “Buz” refers to “Snooks” and “Walker”;

the entry for “Random” refers to “Sudden Death”.


The following possible error has been left as printed:

p. 254 “an ingenious candle-snuffers”






End of Project Gutenberg's The Slang Dictionary, by John Camden Hotten

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SLANG DICTIONARY ***

***** This file should be named 42108-0.txt or 42108-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/2/1/0/42108/

Produced by Henry Flower, Delphine Lettau and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg EBook of Reliques of Ancient English Poetry, Volume
III (of 3), by Thomas Percy

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Reliques of Ancient English Poetry, Volume III (of 3)
       Consisting of Old Heroic Ballads, Songs and Other Pieces
       of Our Earlier Poets Together With Some Few of Later Date

Author: Thomas Percy

Editor: Henry B. Wheatley

Release Date: June 11, 2014 [EBook #45941]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RELIQUES OF ENGLISH POETRY, VOL III ***




Produced by Richard Tonsing, Jonathan Ingram and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Project Gutenberg's A Biblical and Theological Dictionary, by Richard Watson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: A Biblical and Theological Dictionary
       explanatory of the history, manners, and customs of the
       Jews, and neighbouring nations

Author: Richard Watson

Release Date: January 4, 2017 [EBook #53884]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BIBLICAL, THEOLOGICAL DICTIONARY ***




Produced by KD Weeks, Richard Hulse and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)






------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          Transcriber’s Note:

This version of the text cannot represent certain typographical effects.
Italics are delimited with the ‘_’ character as _italic_.

The original text was printed in two columns, which cannot be replicated
here.

As is common in dictionaries, each column is headed with a three-letter
indication of the first and last articles on that page. This feature is
not feasible here.

Minor errors, attributable to the printer, have been corrected. Please
see the transcriber’s note at the end of this text for details regarding
the handling of any textual issues encountered during its preparation.

There are several unusual Greek characters employed in this text:

        ȣ    ligature of ‘ου’

        ϛ    stigma, a ligature of ‘στ’

        ϖ    a cursive variant of ‘π’, almost always used as
             the first character of a word.

        ϐ    a cursive variant of ‘β’, used in any position
             _other_ than the first character, which appears as
             ‘β’.




                       A BIBLICAL AND THEOLOGICAL
                              DICTIONARY:

                             --------------

                           EXPLANATORY OF THE

               HISTORY, MANNERS, AND CUSTOMS OF THE JEWS,

                       AND NEIGHBOURING NATIONS.

       WITH AN ACCOUNT OF THE MOST REMARKABLE PLACES AND PERSONS
                     MENTIONED IN SACRED SCRIPTURE;


                         =An Exposition=

                                 OF THE

                  PRINCIPAL DOCTRINES OF CHRISTIANITY;

        AND NOTICES OF JEWISH AND CHRISTIAN SECTS AND HERESIES.

                          =BY RICHARD WATSON.=

                   [REVISED BY THE AMERICAN EDITORS.]

   ΛΙΜ’ΗΝ ἐϛιν ἀκύμαντος, καὶ τειχος ἀρραγὲς, καὶ ϖύργος ἄσειστος, καὶ
      δόξα ἀναφαίρετος, καὶ ὅ πλα ἄτρωτα, καὶ εὐθυμία ἀμάραντος, καὶ
      ἡδονὴ διηνεκὴς, καὶ ϖάντα οσα ἄν ἔιποι τὶς καλὰ, τῶν θεῖων γραφῶν
      ἡ συνȣσία.--CHRYSOSTOM.

   [An intimate acquaintance with the Holy Scriptures is a secure haven,
      and an impregnable bulwark, and an immovable tower, and
      imperishable glory, and impenetrable armour, and unfading joy, and
      perpetual delight, and whatever other excellence can be uttered.]

[Illustration]

                               NEW-YORK,

                  PUBLISHED BY B. WAUGH AND T. MASON,
         FOR THE METHODIST EPISCOPAL CHURCH, AT THE CONFERENCE
                       OFFICE, 14 CROSBY-STREET.

                                -------

                          J. Collord, Printer.
                                 1832.








“Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1832, by B. WAUGH and
T. MASON, in the Clerk’s Office of the District Court of the Southern
District of New-York.”








                         PREFACE BY THE AUTHOR.

                                -------


In the following Dictionary, compiled from the best sources ancient and
modern, with the addition of many original articles, the selections have
been made with reference to what was thought most useful; and thus many
things of minor importance, usually found in similar works, have been
excluded. Every article too, taken from preceding Dictionaries, has been
carefully weighed, and in a great number of instances modified,
corrected, or enlarged; and numerous other writings variously
illustrative of the Holy Scriptures have been made to contribute a
portion of their information under different heads. This general
acknowledgment renders a particular reference to the works made use of
unnecessary. The fact is, that many of the most valuable of them are
compilations from preceding compilations, and so have no title to be
referred to as original authorities; while in other instances the
articles in this Dictionary have been collected from several sources,
and so altered, or combined with original corrections or enlargements,
that it would be difficult to assign each portion to its proper
original. Where, however, any particulars of fact or history required
confirmation, the authority has been given.

It will be observed that all the places and persons mentioned in the
Bible have not been noticed, for this would only have made the same
unprofitable display of proper names which is seen in several other
Dictionaries; but those have been selected on which any thing important
for the right understanding of the Scriptures seemed, more or less, to
depend. The same rule has been observed as to the natural history of the
Bible, on which department great light has been thrown by Dr. Harris,
whose learned work has been rather freely used. The leading sects and
heresies, ancient and modern, have also been introduced; but with no
design to embody a complete account of religious opinions: those only,
therefore, have been inserted with which it is most necessary that the
theological student should have a general acquaintance.

All that is important in those useful modern works which have been
published upon the manners and customs of the east will be found
embodied under different heads so far as it tends to elucidate the
sacred volume; and many interesting extracts are given from the most
intelligent of our modern travellers in Palestine, and neighbouring
countries, pointing out the present condition of places celebrated in
sacred geography, and especially when the account illustrates and
renders remarkable the fulfilment of prophecy.

At the close of the whole, a complete alphabetical list of proper names
occurring in the Bible, with their significations and right
pronunciation, is appended.

LONDON, _August 20, 1831_.




                 ADVERTISEMENT TO THE AMERICAN EDITION.


No other improvements have been attempted in this edition of Mr.
Watson’s Biblical and Theological Dictionary, than adding a few notes in
relation to some matters existing in this country, which had escaped the
attention of the author, and rendering those passages and phrases into
English which had been left untranslated. Such translations are included
in brackets. It may be proper to remark, that only that part of the work
from the eight hundred and forty second page has been printed under the
superintendence of the present editor; the former part having passed
through the press previous to the last general conference.

It is not necessary to say any thing in commendation of this work.
Whatever merit, however, may be attached to others of a similar
character which have preceded it, we think it will be conceded by all,
that Mr. Watson, by furnishing this Dictionary, has supplied a
desideratum, in the department of Biblical and Theological literature,
which had long been felt, and for doing which the religious community
will not be backward in acknowledging its obligations.

                                                           N. BANGS.

NEW-YORK, _Sept. 25, 1832_.

[Illustration:

  The
  =WORLD=,
  _as Peopled by_
  THE =DESCENDANTS= OF
  =NOAH=
  _Shewing the Countries possessed by_
  =SHEM, HAM & JAPHET=
  and their posterity
]




                                   A

                  BIBLICAL AND THEOLOGICAL DICTIONARY.




AARON, the son of Amram and Jochebed, of the tribe of Levi. Aaron was
three years older than his brother Moses; and when God appeared in the
burning bush, Moses having excused himself from the undertaking
committed to him, by urging that he was slow of speech, Aaron, who was
an eloquent man, was made his interpreter and spokesman; and in
effecting the deliverance of the Hebrews we therefore find them
constantly associated. During the march of the children of Israel
through the wilderness, Aaron and his sons were appointed by God to
exercise for ever the office of priests in the tabernacle.

Moses having ascended the mountain to receive the law from God, Aaron,
his sons, and seventy elders, followed him, Exod. xxiv, 1, 2, 9–11; not
indeed to the summit, but “afar off,” “and they saw the God of Israel,”
that is, the glory in which he appeared, “as it were the paved work of a
sapphire stone, and as it were the body of heaven for clearness;”--a
clear and dazzling azure, a pure, unmingled splendour like that of the
heavens. “And upon the nobles of Israel,” Aaron, his sons, and the
seventy elders, “he laid not his hand,”--they were not destroyed by a
sight which must have overwhelmed the weakness of mortal men had they
not been strengthened to bear it; “and they did eat and drink,”--they
joyfully and devoutly feasted before the Lord, as a religious act, upon
the sacrifices they offered. After this they departed, and Moses
remained with God on the very summit of the mount forty days.

During this period, the people, grown impatient at the long absence of
Moses, addressed themselves to Aaron in a tumultuous manner, saying,
“Make us gods which shall go before us: for, as for this Moses, the man
that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we wot not what is become
of him.” Aaron sinfully yielded to the importunities of the people; and
having ordered them to bring the pendants and the ear-rings of their
wives and children, he melted them down, and then made a golden calf,
probably in imitation of the Egyptian Apis, an ox or calf dedicated to
Osiris. In this instance the image was dedicated to Jehovah the true
God; but the guilt consisted in an attempt to establish image worship,
which, when even ultimately referring to God, he has forbidden. Neither
are images to be worshipped, nor the true God by images;--this is the
standing unrepealed law of Heaven. The calf was called a golden calf, as
being highly ornamented with gold. Having finished the idol, the people
placed it on a pedestal, and danced around it, saying, “These be thy
gods, O Israel;” or, as it is expressed in Nehemiah, “This is thy God,”
the image or symbol of thy God, “which brought thee up out of the land
of Egypt.” Moses, having hastened from the mount by the command of God,
testified to the people, by breaking the tables of the law in their
presence, that the covenant between God and them was now rendered of
none effect through their offence. He also indignantly reproved Aaron,
whose sin indeed had kindled against him the anger of the Lord, so that
he would “have destroyed him but that Moses prayed for him.”

After the tabernacle was built, Moses consecrated Aaron to the high
priesthood with the holy oil, and invested him with his priestly
robes,--his garments “of glory and beauty;” but Aaron’s weakness was
again manifested in concurring with Miriam, his sister, to censure and
oppose Moses, through envy. Aaron, as being the elder brother, could not
perhaps brook his superiority. What the motive of Miriam might be does
not appear; but she being struck with leprosy, this punishment, as being
immediately from God, opened Aaron’s eyes; he acknowledged his fault,
and asked forgiveness of Moses both for himself and his sister.

Aaron himself became also the object of jealousy; but two miraculous
interpositions confirmed him in his office of high priest, as of Divine
appointment. The first was the destruction of Korah, who sought that
office for himself, and of the two hundred and fifty Levites who
supported his pretensions, Num. xvi. The second was the blossoming of
Aaron’s rod, which was designed “to cause the murmurings of the
Israelites against him to cease,” by showing that he was chosen of God.
Moses having, at the command of God, taken twelve rods of an almond tree
from the princes of the twelve tribes, and Aaron’s separately, he placed
them in the tabernacle before the sanctuary, after having written upon
each the name of the tribe which it represented, and upon the rod of
Aaron the name of Aaron. The day following, when the rods were taken
out, that of Aaron “was budded, and brought forth buds, and bloomed
blossoms, and yielded almonds.” This rod therefore was laid up by the
ark, to perpetuate the remembrance of the miracle, and to be a token of
Aaron’s right to his office.

Aaron married Elisheba, the daughter of Amminadab, of the tribe of
Judah, by whom he had four sons, Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar,
Exodus vi, 23. The two first were killed by fire from heaven, as a
punishment for presuming to offer incense with strange fire in their
censers, Lev. x, 1, 2. From the two others the succession of high
priests was continued in Israel.

The account of the death of Aaron is peculiarly solemn and affecting. As
he and Moses, in striking the rock at Meribah, Num. xvi, had not
honoured God by a perfect obedience and faith, he in his wrath declared
unto them that they should not enter into the promised land. Soon after,
the Lord commanded Moses, “Take Aaron, and Eleazar his son, and bring
them up to mount Hor; and strip Aaron of his garments,”--his splendid
pontifical vestments,--“and put them upon Eleazar, his son; and Aaron
shall be gathered unto his people, and shall die there.” This command
was carried into effect in the presence of all Israel, who were encamped
at the foot of the mountain; and his son being invested with the
father’s priestly dress, Aaron died, and all the people mourned for him
thirty days. His sepulchre was left unmarked and unknown, perhaps to
prevent the superstitious reverence of future ages. In Deuteronomy it is
said that Aaron died at Mosera; because that was the name of the
district in which mount Hor was situated.

2. The PRIESTHOOD being established in Aaron and his family, the nature
of this office among the Israelites, and the distinction between the
high priest and the other priests, require here to be pointed out.

Before the promulgation of the law by Moses, the fathers of every
family, and the princes of every tribe, were priests. This was the case
both before and after the flood; for Cain and Abel, Noah, Abraham, Job,
Abimelech, Laban, Isaac, and Jacob, themselves offered their own
sacrifices. But after the Lord had chosen the family of Aaron, and
annexed the priesthood to that line, then the right of sacrificing to
God was reserved to that family only. The high priesthood was confined
to the first-born in succession; and the rest of his posterity were
priests simply so called, or priests of the second order. Both in the
high priest and the second or inferior priests, two things deserve
notice,--their consecration and their office. In some things they
differed, and in others agreed. In their _consecration_ they differed
thus: the high priest had the chrism, or sacred ointment, poured upon
his head, so as to run down to his beard, and the skirts of his garment,
Exod. xxx, 23; Lev. viii, 12; Psa. cxxxiii, 2. But the second priests
were only sprinkled with this oil, mixed with the blood of the
sacrifice, Lev. viii, 30. They differed also in their _robes_, which
were a necessary adjunct to consecration. The high priest wore at the
ordinary times of his ministration in the temple, eight garments;--linen
drawers--a coat of fine linen close to his skin--an embroidered girdle
of fine linen, blue and scarlet, to surround the coat--a robe all of
blue with seventy-two bells, and as many embroidered pomegranates upon
the skirts of it; this was put over the coat and girdle--an ephod of
gold, and of blue, purple, scarlet, and fine linen, curiously wrought,
on the shoulders of which were two stones engraved with the names of the
twelve tribes; this was put over the robe, and girt with a curious
girdle of the same--a breastplate, about a span square, wrought with
gold, blue, purple, scarlet, and fine linen, and fastened upon the ephod
by golden chains and rings; in this breastplate were placed the urim and
thummim, also twelve several stones, containing the names of the twelve
tribes--a mitre of fine linen, sixteen cubits long, to wrap round his
head--and lastly, a plate of gold, or holy crown, two fingers broad,
whereon was engraved, “Holiness to the Lord;” this was tied with blue
lace upon the front of the mitre. Beside these garments, which he wore
in his ordinary ministration, there were four others, which he wore only
upon extraordinary occasions, viz. on the day of expiation, when he went
into the holy of holies, which was once a year. These were: linen
drawers--a linen coat--a linen girdle--a linen mitre, all white, Exod.
xxviii; Lev. xvi, 4. But the inferior priests had only four garments:
linen drawers--a linen coat--a linen girdle--a linen bonnet. The priest
and high priest differed also in their _marriage restrictions_; for the
high priest might not marry a widow, nor a divorced woman, nor a harlot,
but a virgin only; whereas the other priests might lawfully marry a
widow, Lev. xxi, 7.

In the following particulars the high priest and inferior priests agreed
in their consecration: both were to be void of bodily blemish--both were
to be presented to the Lord at the door of the tabernacle--both were to
be washed with water--both were to be consecrated by offering up certain
sacrifices--both were to have the blood of a ram put upon the tip of the
right ear, the thumb of the right hand, and the great toe of the right
foot, Exod. xxix, 20. In the time of consecration, certain pieces of the
sacrifice were put into the priest’s hand, which was called “filling his
hand;” hence the Hebrew phrase, “to fill the hand,” signifies
consecration.

In the discharge of their offices, the high priest differed from the
other priests in these particulars: the high priest only, and that but
once a year, might enter into the holy of holies--the high priest might
not mourn for his nearest relations by uncovering his head, or tearing
any part of his garments, except the skirt; whereas the priest was
allowed to mourn for these six,--father, mother, son, daughter, brother,
and sister if she had no husband, Lev. xxi, 2, 10, 11; but they agreed
in these respects: they both burnt incense and offered sacrifices--they
both sounded the trumpet, either as an alarm in war, or to assemble the
people and their rulers--they both slew the sacrifices--both instructed
the people--and both judged of leprosy.

For the more orderly performance of these offices, the high priest had
his sagan, who, in case of the high priest’s pollution, performed his
duty. The high priest and his sagan resembled our bishop and his
suffragan.

3. Aaron was a TYPE of Christ, not personally, but as the high priest of
the Jewish church. All the priests, as offering gifts and sacrifices,
were in their office types of Christ; but Aaron especially, 1. As the
high priest. 2. In entering into the holy place on the great day of
atonement, and reconciling the people to God; in making intercession for
them, and pronouncing upon them the blessing of Jehovah, at the
termination of solemn services. 3. In being anointed with the holy oil
by _effusion_, which was prefigurative of the Holy Spirit with which our
Lord was endowed. 4. In bearing the names of all the tribes of Israel
upon his breast and upon his shoulders, thus presenting them always
before God, and representing them to him. 5. In being the medium of
their inquiring of God by urim and thummim; and of the communication of
his will to them. But though the offices of Aaron were typical, the
priesthood of Christ is of a different and higher ORDER than his,
namely, that of MELCHIZEDECK. See CALF, PRIEST, TYPE, EPHOD,
BREASTPLATE, URIM.

AB, in the Hebrew chronology, the eleventh month of the civil year, and
the fifth of the ecclesiastical year, which began with Nisan. This month
answered to the moon of July, comprehending part of July and of August,
and contained thirty days.

The first day of this month is observed as a fast by the Jews, in memory
of Aaron’s death; and the ninth, in commemoration of the destruction of
the temple by Nebuchadnezzar, in the year before Christ 587. Josephus
observes, that the burning of the temple by Nebuchadnezzar happened on
the same day of the year on which it was afterward burned by Titus. The
same day was remarkable for Adrian’s edict, which prohibited the Jews to
continue in Judea, or to look toward Jerusalem and lament its
desolation. The eighteenth day is also kept as a fast, because the
sacred lamp was extinguished on that night, in the reign of Ahaz. On the
twenty-first, or, according to Scaliger, the twenty-second day, was a
feast called Xylophoria, from their laying up the necessary wood in the
temple: and on the twenty-fourth, a feast in commemoration of the
abolishing of a law by the Asmoneans, or Maccabees, which had been
introduced by the Sadducees, and which enacted, that both sons and
daughters should alike inherit the estate of their parents.

ABADDON, Heb. corresponding to _Apollyon_, Gr. that is, _Destroyer_, is
represented, Rev. ix, 11, as king of the locusts, and the angel of the
bottomless pit. Le Clerc and Dr. Hammond understand by the locusts in
this passage, the zealots and robbers who infested and desolated Judea
before Jerusalem was taken by the Romans; and by Abaddon, John of
Gischala, who having treacherously left that town before it was
surrendered to Titus, came to Jerusalem and headed those of the zealots
who acknowledged him as their king, and involved the Jews in many
grievous calamities. The learned Grotius concurs in opinion, that the
locusts are designed to represent the sect of the zealots, who appeared
among the Jews during the siege, and at the time of the destruction of
Jerusalem. But Mr. Mede remarks, that the title Abaddon alludes to
Obodas, the common name of the ancient monarchs of that part of Arabia
from which Mohammed came; and considers the passage as descriptive of
the inundation of the Saracens. Mr. Lowman adopts and confirms this
interpretation. He shows that the rise and progress of the Mohammedan
religion and empire exhibit a signal accomplishment of this prophecy.
All the circumstances here recited correspond to the character of the
Arabians, and the history of the period that extended from A. D. 568 to
A. D. 675. In conformity to this opinion, Abaddon may be understood to
denote either Mohammed, who issued from the abyss, or the cave of Hera,
to propagate his pretended revelations, or, more generally, the Saracen
power. Mr. Bryant supposes Abaddon to have been the name of the Ophite
deity, the worship of whom prevailed very anciently and very generally.

ABANA. Naaman, the leper, on being directed to wash in the river Jordan,
says, 2 Kings v, 12, “Are not Abana and Pharpar, rivers of Damascus,
better than all the waters of Israel?” Probably the Abana is a branch of
the Barrady, or Chrysorrhoas, which derives its source from the foot of
mount Libanus, eastward; runs round and through Damascus, and continues
its course till lost in the wilderness, four or five leagues south of
the city. Benjamin of Tudela will have that part of Barrady which runs
through Damascus to be the Abana, and the streams which water the
gardens without the city, to be Pharpar; but perhaps the Pharpar is the
same with Orontes, the most noted river of Syria, which, taking its rise
a little to the north or north-east of Damascus, glides through a
delightful plain, till, after passing Antioch, and running about two
hundred miles to the north-west, it loses itself in the Mediterranean
sea, 2 Kings v, 12.

ABBA, a Syriac word, which signifies _father_. The learned Mr. Selden,
from the Babylonian Gemara, has proved that slaves were not allowed to
use the title abba in addressing the master of the family to which they
belonged. This may serve to illustrate Rom. viii, 15, and Gal. iv, 6, as
it shows that through faith in Christ all true Christians pass into the
relation of sons; are permitted to address God with filial confidence in
prayer; and to regard themselves as heirs of the heavenly inheritance.
This adoption into the family of God, inseparably follows our
justification; and the power to call God our Father, in this special and
appropriative sense, results from the inward testimony given to our
forgiveness by the Holy Spirit. St. Paul and St. Mark use the Syriac
word _abba_, a term which was understood in the synagogues and primitive
assemblies of Christians; but added to it when writing to foreigners the
explanation, _father_. Figuratively, abba means also a superior, in
respect of age, dignity, or affection. It is more particularly used in
the Syriac, Coptic, and Ethiopic churches as a title given to their
bishops. The bishops themselves bestow the title abba more eminently
upon the bishop of Alexandria, which occasioned the people to give him
the title of baba, or papa, that is, grandfather; a title which he bore
before the bishop of Rome.

ABEDNEGO, the Chaldee name given by the king of Babylon’s officer to
Azariah, one of Daniel’s companions, Dan. i, 7. This name imports the
servant of Nago, or Nego, which is supposed to signify the sun, or
morning star, so called from its brightness. Abednego was thrown into a
fiery furnace, at Babylon, with his two companions Shadrach and Meshach,
for refusing to adore the statue erected by the command of
Nebuchadnezzar. God suffered them not to be injured by the flames; but
made the whole to redound to his own glory, and the shame of the idols
of Babylon. One like unto the Son of God, or a Divine person, probably
the Angel of the Divine presence himself, appeared in the midst of them;
and they came out of the furnace, which had been heated seven times
hotter than usual, so completely preserved from the power of the flames,
that not even “the smell of fire had passed upon them.” This was an
illustrious instance of the courageous and hallowed spirit of martyrdom;
and the interposition was no doubt designed to encourage the Jews while
in captivity, living among idolaters, to hold fast their religion. It is
an instance also of those gracious visitations to the old Heathen world,
by which it was loudly called from its idolatries, and aroused to the
acknowledgment of the true and only Jehovah, who, in various ways, “left
not himself without witness” among them. A great temporary effect was
produced by this and other miracles related in the book of Daniel; but
the people relapsed again into idolatry, and justly brought upon
themselves all those wasting judgments which in succession swept over
the mightiest and most ancient states.

ABEL. He was the second son of Adam and Eve, and born probably in the
second or third year of the world; though some will have it that he and
Cain were twins. His name signifies _vapour_, _vanity_, and might be
given either because our first parents now began so to feel the
emptiness and vanity of all earthly things, that the birth of another
son reminded them painfully of it, although in itself a matter of joy;
or it was imposed under prophetic impulse, and obscurely referred to his
premature death. His employment was that of a shepherd; Cain followed
the occupation of his father, and was a tiller of the ground. Whether
they remained in their father’s family at the time when they brought
their offerings to the Lord, or had establishments separate from that of
Adam, does not clearly appear. Abel was probably unmarried, or had no
children; but Cain’s wife is mentioned. “At the end of the days,”--which
is a more literal rendering than “in process of time,” as in our
translation, that is, on the Sabbath,--both brothers brought an offering
to the Lord. Cain “brought of the fruit of the ground;” Abel “the
firstlings of his flock, and of the fat thereof.” “And the Lord had
respect to Abel and to his offering; but unto Cain and his offering he
had not respect.” As Cain afterward complains that “he should be hid
from the _face_ or _presence_ of the Lord,” it is probable that the
worship of the first family was performed before some visible
manifestation of the glory of God, which thus consecrated a particular
place for their services. Some have thought that this was at the east
gate of Eden, where “Cherubim and a flaming sword were placed;” but this
was a vengeful manifestation, and could only have inspired a dread of
God inconsistent with the confidence and hope with which men through the
promise of redemption were now encouraged to draw nigh to him. The
respect which God was pleased to show to Abel’s offering, appears from
the account to have been sensibly declared; for Cain must have known by
some token that the sacrifice of Abel was accepted, the absence of which
sign, as to his own offering, showed that it was rejected. Whether this
was by fire going forth from “the presence of the Lord,” to consume the
sacrifice, as in later instances recorded in the Old Testament, or in
some other way, it is in vain to inquire;--that the token of acceptance
was a sensible one is however an almost certain inference. The effect of
this upon Cain was not to humble him before God, but to excite anger
against his brother; and, being in the field with him, or, as the old
versions have it, having said to him, “Let us go out into the field,”
“he rose up against Abel his brother, and slew him;” and for that crime,
by which the first blood of man was shed by man upon the earth,--a
murder aggravated by the relationship and the “righteous” character of
the sufferer, and having in it also the nature of religious
persecution,--he was pronounced by the Lord “cursed from the earth.”

2. As the sacrifice of Abel is the first on record, and has given rise
to some controversy, it demands particular attention. It was offered,
says St. Paul, “in faith,” and it was “a more excellent sacrifice” than
that of Cain. Both these expressions intimate that it was EXPIATORY and
PREFIGURATIVE.

As to the matter of the sacrifice, it was an _animal_ offering. “Cain
brought of the fruit of the ground; and Abel also brought of the
firstlings of his flock, and of the fat thereof;” or, more literally,
“the fat of them,” that is, according to the Hebrew idiom, the fattest
or best of his flock; and in this circumstance consisted its specific
character as an act of _faith_. This is supported by the import of the
phrase, ϖλείονα θυσίαν, used by the Apostle in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, when speaking of the sacrifice of Abel. Our translators have
rendered it, “a more excellent sacrifice.” Wickliffe translates it, as
Archbishop Magee observes, uncouthly, but in the full sense of the
original, “a much more sacrifice;” and the controversy which has arisen
on this point is, whether this epithet of “much more,” or “fuller,”
refers to quantity or quality; whether it is to be understood in the
sense of a _more abundant_, or of a _better_, a _more excellent_
sacrifice. Dr. Kennicott takes it in the sense of measure and quantity,
as well as quality; and supposes that Abel brought a double offering of
the firstlings of his flock, and of the fruit of the ground _also_. His
criticism has been very satisfactorily refuted by Archbishop Magee. The
sacrifice of Abel was that of animal victims, and it was indicative not
of gratitude but of “faith:” a quality not to be made manifest by the
_quantity_ of an offering, for the one has no relation to the other.

3. This will more fully appear if we consider the import of the words of
the Apostle,--“By FAITH Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice
than Cain, by which he obtained WITNESS that he was RIGHTEOUS, God
testifying of his gifts; and by it, he, being dead, yet speaketh.” Now
what is the meaning of the Apostle, when he says that it was witnessed
or testified to Abel that he was _righteous_? His doctrine is, that men
are sinners; that all, consequently, need pardon; and _to be declared_,
_witnessed_, and _accounted righteous_, are, according to his style of
writing, the same as “to be justified, pardoned, and dealt with as
righteous.” Thus he argues that Abraham believed God, “and it was
accounted to him for righteousness,”--“that faith was reckoned to
Abraham for righteousness,”--“that he received the sign of circumcision,
a _seal_,” a visible confirmatory, declaratory, and witnessing mark “of
the righteousness which he had by faith.” In these cases we have a
similarity so striking, that they can scarcely fail to explain each
other. In both, sinful men are placed in the condition of _righteous_
men; the instrument, in both cases, is _faith_; and the transaction is,
in both cases also, publicly and sensibly _witnessed_,--as to Abraham,
by the sign of circumcision; as to Abel, by a visible acceptance of his
sacrifice, and the rejection of that of Cain.

Abel had faith, and he expressed that faith by the kind of sacrifice he
offered. It was in this way that his faith “pleased God;” it pleased him
as a principle, and by the act to which it led, which act was the
offering of a sacrifice to God different from that of Cain. Cain had not
this faith, whatever might be its object; and Cain, accordingly, did not
bring an offering to which God had “respect.” That which vitiated the
offering of Cain was the want of this faith; for his offering was not
significant of faith: that which “pleased God,” in the case of Abel, was
his faith; and he had “respect” to his offering, because it was the
expression of that faith; and upon his faith so expressing itself, God
witnessed to him “that he was righteous.” So forcibly do the words of
St. Paul, when commenting upon this transaction, show, that Abel’s
sacrifice was accepted, because of its immediate connection with his
_faith_, for by faith he is said to have offered it; and whatever it
might be, which made Abel’s offering differ from that of Cain, whether
_abundance_, or _kind_, or both, this was the result of his faith. So
evident also is it from the Apostle, that Abel was witnessed to be
“righteous,” not with reference to any previous “habit of a religious
life,” as some say, but with reference to his _faith_; and to this faith
as expressing itself by his offering “a more excellent sacrifice.”

4. If, then, the faith of Abel had an immediate connection with his
sacrifice, and both with his being accepted as “righteous,”--that is,
_justified_, in St. Paul’s use of the term,--to what had his faith
respect? The particular object of the faith of the elders, celebrated in
Hebrews xi, is to be deduced from the circumstances mentioned as
illustrative of the existence and operation of this great principle, and
by which it manifested itself in them. Let us explain this, and then
ascertain the object of Abel’s faith also from the manner of its
manifestation,--from the acts in which it embodied and rendered itself
conspicuous.

Faith, in this chapter, is taken in the sense of _affiance_ in God, and,
as such, it can only be exercised toward God, as to all its particular
acts, in those respects in which we have some warrant to confide in him.
This supposes revelation, and, in particular, promises or declarations
on his part, as the ground of every act of affiance. When, therefore, it
is said that “by faith Enoch was translated that he should not see
death,” it must be supposed that he had some promise or intimation to
this effect, on which, improbable as the event was, he nobly relied; and
in the result God honoured his faith in the sight of all men. The faith
of Noah had immediate respect to the threatened flood, and to the
promise of God to preserve him in the ark which he was commanded to
prepare. The chapter is filled with other instances, expressed or
implied; and from the whole, as well as from the nature of things, it
will appear, that, when the Apostle speaks of the faith of the elders in
its particular acts, he represents it as having respect to some promise,
declaration, or revelation of God.

This revelation was necessarily antecedent to the faith; but it is also
to be observed, that the acts by which the faith was represented,
whenever it was represented by particular acts, and when the case
admitted it, had a natural and striking conformity and correspondence to
the previous revelation. So Noah built the ark, which indicated that he
had heard the threat of the world’s destruction by water, and had
received the promise of his own preservation, and that of his family, as
well as that of a part of the beasts of the earth. When Abraham went
into Canaan at the command of God, and upon the promise that that
country should become the inheritance of his decendants, he showed his
faith by taking possession of it for them in anticipation, and his
residence there indicated the kind of promise which he had received.
Thus these instances show, that when the faith which the Apostle
commends exhibited itself in some particular act, that act had a
correspondency to the previous promise or revelation which was the
ground of faith. We must therefore interpret the acts of Abel’s faith so
as to make them also correspond with an antecedent revelation. His faith
had respect to some previous revelation, and the nature of the
revelation is to be collected from the significant manner in which he
declared his faith in it.

Now that which Abel did “by faith,” was, _generally_, to perform an act
of solemn worship, in the confidence that it would be acceptable to God.
This supposes a revelation, immediate or by tradition, that such acts of
worship were acceptable to God, or his faith could have had no warrant,
and would not have been faith, but fancy. But the case must be
considered more particularly. His faith led him to offer “a more
excellent sacrifice” than that of Cain; but this as necessarily implies,
that there was some antecedent revelation to which his faith, as thus
expressed, had respect, and on which that peculiarity of his offering,
which distinguished it from the offering of Cain, was founded; a
revelation which indicated that the way in which God would be approached
acceptably, in solemn worship, was by animal sacrifices. Without this,
the faith to which his offering, which was an offering of the firstlings
of his flock, had a special fitness and adaptation, could have had no
warrant in Divine authority. But this revelation must have included, in
order to its being the ground of faith, as “the substance of things
hoped for,” a promise of a benefit to be conferred, in which promise
Abel might _confide_. But if so, then this promise must have been
connected, not with the worship of God in general, or performed in any
way whatever indifferently, but with his worship by animal oblations;
for it was in this way that the faith of Abel specially and
distinctively indicated itself. The antecedent revelation was,
therefore, a promise of a benefit to be conferred, by means of animal
sacrifice; and we are taught what this benefit was, by that which was
actually received by the offerer,--“He obtained witness that he was
_righteous_;” which must be interpreted in the sense of a declaration of
his personal justification, and acceptance as righteous, by the
forgiveness of his sins. The reason of Abel’s acceptance and of Cain’s
rejection is hereby made manifest; the one, in seeking the Divine
favour, conformed to his established and appointed method of being
approached by guilty men, and the other not only neglected this, but
profanely and presumptuously substituted his own inventions.

5. It is impossible, then, to allow the sacrifice of Abel, in this
instance, to have been an act of FAITH, without supposing that it had
respect to a previous revelation, which agreed with all the parts of
that sacrificial action by which he expressed his faith in it. Had
Abel’s sacrifice been eucharistic merely, it would have expressed
gratitude, but not faith; or if faith in the general sense of confidence
in God that he would receive an act of grateful worship, and reward the
worshippers, it did not more express faith than the offering of Cain,
who surely believed these two points, or he would not have brought an
offering of any kind. The offering of Abel expressed a faith which Cain
had not; and the doctrinal principles which Abel’s faith respected were
such as his sacrifice visibly embodied. If it was not an eucharistic
sacrifice, it was an expiatory one; and, in fact, it is only in a
sacrifice of this kind, that it is possible to see that faith exhibited
which Abel had, and Cain had not. If then we refer to the subsequent
sacrifices of expiation appointed by Divine authority, and their
explanation in the New Testament, it will be obvious to what doctrines
and principles of an antecedent revelation the faith of Abel had
respect, and which his sacrifice, the exhibition of his faith,
proclaimed: confession of the fact of being a sinner,--acknowledgment
that the demerit and penalty of sin is death,--submission to an
appointed mode of expiation,--animal sacrifice offered _vicariously_,
but in itself a mere type of a better sacrifice, “the Seed of the
woman,” appointed to be offered at some future period,--and the efficacy
of this appointed method of expiation to obtain forgiveness, and to
admit the guilty into the Divine favour.

“Abel,” Dr. Magee justly says, “in firm reliance on the promise of God,
and in obedience to his command, offered that sacrifice which had been
enjoined as the religious expression of his faith; whilst Cain,
disregarding the gracious assurances that had been vouchsafed, or at
least disdaining to adopt the prescribed mode of manifesting his belief,
possibly as not appearing to _his reason_ to possess any efficacy or
natural fitness, thought he had sufficiently acquitted himself of his
duty in acknowledging the general superintendence of God, and expressing
his gratitude to the Supreme Benefactor, by presenting some of those
good things which he thereby confessed to have been derived from his
bounty. In short, Cain, the first-born of the fall, exhibits the first
fruits of his parents’ disobedience, in the arrogance and
self-sufficiency of reason rejecting the aids of revelation, because
they fell not within its apprehension of right. He takes the first place
in the annals of Deism, and displays, in his proud rejection of the
ordinance of sacrifice, the same spirit which, in later days, has
actuated his _enlightened_ followers, in rejecting the sacrifice of
Christ.”

Abel was killed about the year of the world, 130.

ABEL-MISRAIM, the floor of Atad, beyond the river Jordan, where Joseph,
his brethren, and the Egyptians mourned for the death of Jacob, Gen. l,
11. On this occasion the funeral procession was, at the command of
Joseph, attended by “all the elders of Egypt, and all the servants of
Pharaoh, and all his house, and the house of his brethren, chariots and
horsemen, a very great company;” an affecting proof, as it has been
remarked, of Joseph’s simplicity and singleness of heart, which allowed
him to give to the great men of Egypt, over whom he bore absolute rule,
an opportunity of observing his own comparatively humble origin, by
leading them in attendance upon his father’s corpse to the valleys of
Canaan, the modest cradle of his race, and to their simple burial
places.

ABEL-SHITTIM, a city situate in the plains of Moab, beyond Jordan,
opposite to Jericho, Num. xxv, 1, &c; xxiii, 49; Joshua xi, 1. Eusebius
says it stood in the neighbourhood of mount Peor. Moses encamped at
Abel-Shittim some time before the Hebrew army passed the Jordan. Here
the Israelites fell into idolatry, and worshipped Baal-peor, for which
God punished them by the destruction of twenty-four thousand persons in
one day.

ABIAH, the second son of the prophet Samuel, and brother of Joel. Samuel
having entrusted to his sons the administration of public justice, and
admitted them to a share in the government, they behaved so ill, that
the people demanded a king, 1 Sam. viii, 2. A. M. 2909.

ABIATHAR, the son of Ahimelech, and the tenth high priest among the
Jews, and fourth in descent from Eli, 2 Sam. viii, 17; 1 Chron. xviii,
16. When Saul sent to Nob to murder all the priests, Abiathar escaped
the massacre, and fled to David in the wilderness. There he continued in
the quality of high priest; but Saul, out of aversion to Ahimelech, whom
he imagined to have betrayed his interests, transferred the dignity of
the high priesthood from Ithamar’s family into that of Eleazar, by
conferring this office upon Zadok. Thus there were, at the same time,
two high priests in Israel, Abiathar with David, and Zadok with Saul. In
this state things continued, until the reign of Solomon, when Abiathar,
being attached to the party of Adonijah, was, by Solomon, divested of
his priesthood, A. M. 2989; and the race of Zadok alone performed the
functions of that office during the reign of Solomon, to the exclusion
of the family of Ithamar, according to the word of the Lord to Eli, 1
Sam. ii, 30, &c.

ABIB, the name of the first Hebrew sacred month, Exod. xiii, 4. This
month was afterward called Nisan; it contained thirty days, and answered
to part of our March and April. Abib signifies green ears of corn, or
fresh fruits, according to Jerom’s translation, Exod. xiii, 4, and to
the LXX. It was so named because corn, particularly barley, was in ear
at that time. It was an early custom to give names to months, from the
appearances of nature; and the custom is still in force among many
nations. The year among the Jews commenced in September, and
consequently their jubilees and other civil matters were regulated in
this way, Lev. xxv, 8–10; but their sacred year began in Abib. This
change took place at the redemption of Israel from Egypt, Exod. xii, 2,
“This shall be to you the beginning of months.” Ravanelli observes, that
as this deliverance from Egypt was a figure of the redemption of the
church of Jesus Christ, who died and rose again in this month, it was
made the “beginning of months,” to lead the church to expect the
acceptable year of the Lord. On the tenth day of this month the paschal
lamb was taken; and on the fourteenth they ate the passover. On the
seven succeeding days they celebrated the feast of unleavened bread, on
the last of which days they held a solemn convocation, Exod. xii, xiii.
On the fifteenth they gathered the sheaf of the barley first fruits, and
on the following day presented an offering of it to the Lord, which
having done they might begin their harvest, Lev. xxiii.

ABIHU, the son of Aaron, the high priest, was consumed, together with
his brother Nadab, by fire sent from God, because he had offered incense
with strange fire, instead of taking it from the altar, Lev. x, 1, 2.
This calamity happened A. M. 2514; within eight days after the
consecration of Aaron and his sons. Some commentators believe that this
fire proceeded from the altar of burnt offerings; others, that it came
from the altar of incense. Several interpreters, as the Rabbins, Lyra,
Cajetan, and others, are of opinion, that Nadab and Abihu were overtaken
with wine, and so forgot to take the sacred fire in their censers. This
conjecture is founded on the command of God delivered immediately
afterward to the priests, forbidding them the use of wine during the
time they should be employed in the service of the temple. Another class
allege, that there was nothing so heinous in their transgression, but it
was awfully punished, to teach ministers fidelity and exactness in
discharging their office. It had a vastly more important meaning,--this
instance of vengeance is a standing example of that divine wrath which
shall consume all who pretend to serve God, except with incense kindled
from the one altar and offering by which he for ever perfects them that
are sanctified.

ABIJAH, the son of Jeroboam, the first king of the ten tribes, who died
very young, 1 Kings xiv, 1, &c, A. M. 3046.--2. The son of Rehoboam,
king of Judah, and of Maachah, the daughter of Uriel, who succeeded his
father, A. M. 3046, 2 Chron. xi, 20; xiii, 2, &c. The Rabbins reproach
this monarch with neglecting to destroy the profane altar which Jeroboam
had erected at Bethel; and with not suppressing the worship of the
golden calves there after his victory over that prince.

ABILENE, a small province in Cœlo Syria, between Lebanon and
Antilibanus. Of this place Lysanias was governor in the fifteenth year
of Tiberius, Luke iii, 1. Abela, or Abila, the capital, was north of
Damascus, and south of Heliopolis.

ABIMELECH. This seems to have been the title of the kings of Philistia,
as Cæsar was of the Roman emperors, and Pharaoh of the sovereigns of
Egypt. It was the name also of one of the sons of Gideon, who became a
judge of Israel, Judges ix; and of the Jewish high priest, who gave
Goliath’s sword, which had been deposited in the tabernacle, and part of
the shew bread, to David, at the time this prince was flying from Saul,
1 Sam. xxi, 1.

ABIRAM, the eldest son of Hiel, the Bethelite. Joshua having destroyed
the city of Jericho, pronounced this curse: “Cursed be the man, before
the Lord, that riseth up and buildeth this city, Jericho: he shall lay
the foundation thereof in his first-born, and in his youngest son shall
he set up the gates of it,” Joshua vi, 26. Hiel of Bethel, about five
hundred and thirty-seven years after this imprecation, having undertaken
to rebuild Jericho, whilst he was laying the foundation of it, lost his
eldest son, Abiram, 1 Kings xvi, 34; and Segub, the youngest, when they
set up the gates of it: a remarkable instance of a prophetic
denunciation fulfilled, perhaps on a person who would not credit the
tradition, or the truth of the prediction. So true is the word of the
Lord; so minutely are the most distant contingencies foreseen by him;
and so exact is the accomplishment of Divine prophecy!

2. ABIRAM, the son of Eliab, of the tribe of Reuben, was one of those
who conspired with Korah and Dathan against Moses in the wilderness, and
was swallowed up alive, with his companions, by the earth, which opened
to receive them, Num. xvi.

ABISHAG, a young woman, a native of Shunam, in the tribe of Issachar.
David, at the age of seventy, finding no warmth in his bed, was advised
by his physicians to procure some young person, who might communicate
the heat required. To this end Abishag was presented to him, who was one
of the most beautiful women in Israel, 1 Kings i, 3; and the king made
her his wife. After his death, Adonijah requested her in marriage, for
which he lost his life; Solomon perceiving in this a design upon the
crown also. Adonijah was his elder brother, an intriguing man, and had
aspired to be king before the death of David, and had had his life
spared only upon the condition of his peaceable conduct. By this request
he convinced Solomon, that he was still actuated by political views, and
this brought upon him the punishment of treason.

ABISHAI, the son of Zeruiah, David’s sister, who was one of the most
valiant men of his time, and one of the principal generals in David’s
armies.

ABLUTION, purification by washing the body, either in whole or part.
Ablutions appear to be almost as ancient as external worship itself.
Moses enjoined them; the Heathens adopted them; and Mohammed and his
followers have continued them: thus they have been introduced among most
nations, and make a considerable part of all superstitious religions.
The Egyptian priests had their diurnal and nocturnal ablutions; the
Grecians, their sprinklings; the Romans, their lustrations and
lavations; the Jews, their washings of hands and feet, beside their
baptisms; the ancient Christians used ablution before communion, which
the Romish church still retains before the mass, sometimes after; the
Syrians, Copts, &c, have their solemn washings on Good Friday; the Turks
their greater and less ablutions, &c.

Lustration, among the Romans, was a solemn ceremony by which they
purified their cities, fields, armies, or people, after any crime or
impurity. Lustrations might be performed by fire, by sulphur, by water,
and by air; the last was applied by ventilation, or fanning the thing to
be purified. All sorts of people, slaves excepted, might perform some
kind of lustration. When a person died the house was to be swept in a
particular manner; new married persons were sprinkled by the priest with
water. People sometimes, by way of purification, ran several times naked
through the streets. There was scarcely any action performed, at the
beginning and end of which some ceremony was not required to purify
themselves and appease the gods.

ABNER was the uncle of king Saul, and the general of his army. After
Saul’s death, he made Ishbosheth king; and for seven years supported the
family of Saul, in opposition to David; but in most of his skirmishes
came off with loss. While Ishbosheth’s and David’s troops lay near each
other, hard by Gibeon, Abner challenged Joab to select twelve of David’s
warriors to fight with an equal number of his. Joab consented: the
twenty-four engaged; and fell together on the spot. A fierce battle
ensued, in which Abner and his troops were routed. Abner himself was
hotly pursued by Asahel, whom he killed by a back stroke of his spear.
Still he was followed by Joab and Abishai, till he, who in the morning
sported with murder, was obliged at even to entreat that Joab would stay
his troops from the effusion of blood, 2 Sam. ii.

Not long after, Abner, taking it highly amiss for Ishbosheth to charge
him with lewd behaviour toward Rizpah, Saul’s concubine, vowed that he
would quickly transfer the whole kingdom into the hands of David. He
therefore commenced a correspondence with David, and had an interview
with him at Hebron. Abner had just left the feast at which David had
entertained him, when Joab, informed of the matter, warmly remonstrated,
asserting, that Abner had come as a spy. On his own authority he sent a
messenger to invite him back, to have some farther communication with
the king; and when Abner was come into Joab’s presence, the latter,
partly from jealousy lest Abner might become his superior, and partly to
revenge his brother Asahel’s death, mortally stabbed him in the act of
salutation. David, to show how heartily he detested the act, honoured
Abner with a splendid funeral, and composed an elegy on his death, 2
Sam. iii.

ABOMINATION. This term was used with regard to the Hebrews, who, being
shepherds, are said to have been an abomination to the Egyptians;
because they sacrificed the animals held sacred by that people, as oxen,
goats, sheep, &c, which the Egyptians esteemed unlawful. This word is
also applied in the sacred writings to idolatry and idols, not only
because the worship of idols is in itself an abominable thing, but
likewise because the ceremonies of idolaters were almost always of an
infamous and licentious nature. For this reason, Chrysostom affirms,
that every idol, and every image of a man, was called an abomination
among the Jews. The “abomination of desolation” foretold by the Prophet
Daniel, x, 27, xi, 31, is supposed by some interpreters to denote the
statue of Jupiter Olympius, which Antiochus Epiphanes caused to be
erected in the temple of Jerusalem. The second of the passages above
cited may probably refer to this circumstance, as the statue of Jupiter
did, in fact, “make desolate,” by banishing the true worship of God, and
those who performed it, from the temple. But the former passage,
considered in its whole connection, bears more immediate reference to
that which the evangelists have denominated the “abomination of
desolation,” Matt. xxiv, 15, 16; Mark xiii, 14. This, without doubt,
signifies the ensigns of the Roman armies under the command of Titus,
during the last siege of Jerusalem. The images of their gods and
emperors were delineated on these ensigns; and the ensigns themselves,
especially the eagles, which were carried at the heads of the legions,
were objects of worship; and, according to the usual style of Scripture,
they were therefore an abomination. Those ensigns were placed upon the
ruins of the temple after it was taken and demolished; and, as Josephus
informs us, the Romans sacrificed to them there. The horror with which
the Jews regarded them, sufficiently appears from the account which
Josephus gives of Pilate’s introducing them into the city, when he sent
his army from Cæsarea into winter quarters at Jerusalem, and of
Vitellius’s proposing to march through Judea, after he had received
orders from Tiberius to attack Aretas, king of Petra. The people
supplicated and remonstrated, and induced Pilate to remove the army, and
Vitellius to march his troops another way. The Jews applied the above
passage of Daniel to the Romans, as we are informed by Jerome. The
learned Mr. Mede concurs in the same opinion. Sir Isaac Newton, _Obs. on
Daniel_ ix, xii, observes, that in the sixteenth year of the emperor
Adrian, B. C. 132, the Romans accomplished the prediction of Daniel by
building a temple to Jupiter Capitolinus, where the temple of God in
Jerusalem had stood. Upon this occasion the Jews, under the conduct of
Barchochab, rose up in arms against the Romans, and in the war had fifty
cities demolished, nine hundred and eighty-five of their best towns
destroyed, and five hundred and eighty thousand men slain by the sword;
and in the end of the war, B. C. 136, they were banished from Judea upon
pain of death; and thenceforth the land remained desolate of its old
inhabitants. Others again have applied the prediction of Daniel to the
invasion and desolation of Christendom by the Mohammedans, and to their
conversion of the churches into mosques. From this interpretation they
infer, that the religion of Mohammed will prevail in the east one
thousand two hundred and sixty years, and be succeeded by the
restoration of the Jews, the destruction of antichrist, the full
conversion of the Gentiles to the church of Christ, and the commencement
of the millennium.

In general, whatever is morally or ceremonially impure, or leads to sin,
is designated an _abomination_ to God. Thus lying lips are said to be an
_abomination_ to the Lord. Every thing in doctrine or practice which
tended to corrupt the simplicity of the Gospel is also in Scripture
called abominable; hence Babylon is represented, Rev. xvii, 4, as
holding in her hand a cup “full of abominations.” In this view, to “work
abomination,” is to introduce idolatry, or any other great corruption,
into the church and worship of God, 1 Kings xi, 7.

ABRAM, אברם, _a high father_; and ABRAHAM, אבררם, _father of a great
multitude_, the son of Terah, born at Ur, a city of Chaldea, A. M. 2008.
The account of this eminent patriarch occupies so large a part of the
book of Genesis, and stands so intimately connected with both the Jewish
and Christian dispensations,--with the one by a political and religious,
and with the other by a mystical, relation,--that his history demands
particular notice. Our account may be divided into his _personal
history_, and his _typical, and mystic character_.

I. Abraham’s PERSONAL history.

1. Chaldea, the native country of Abraham, was inhabited by a pastoral
people, who were almost irresistibly invited to the study of the motions
of the heavenly bodies, by the peculiar serenity of the heavens in that
climate, and their habit of spending their nights in the open air in
tending their flocks. The first rudiments of astronomy, as a science, is
traced to this region; and here, too, one of the earliest forms of
idolatry, the worship of the host of heaven, usually called Tsabaism,
first began to prevail. During the three hundred and fifty years which
elapsed between the deluge and the birth of Abraham, this and other
idolatrous superstitions had greatly corrupted the human race, perverted
the simple forms of the patriarchal religion, and beclouded the import
of its typical rites. The family of Abraham was idolatrous, for his
“fathers served other gods beyond the flood,” that is, the great river
Euphrates; but whether he himself was in the early period of his life an
idolater, we are not informed by Moses. The Arabian and Jewish legends
speak of his early idolatry, his conversion from it, and of his zeal in
breaking the images in his father’s house; but these are little to be
depended upon. Before his call he was certainly a worshipper of the true
God; and that not in form only, but “in spirit and in truth.” Whilst
Abraham was still sojourning in Ur, “the God of glory” appeared to him,
and said unto him, “Get thee out of thy country and from thy kindred,
and go into the land which I shall show thee;” and so firm was his faith
in the providence and care of God, that although the place of his future
abode was not indicated, nor any information given of the nature of the
country, or the character of its inhabitants, he nevertheless promptly
obeyed, and “went out, not knowing whither he went.” Terah his father,
Nahor his brother, and Lot his nephew, the son of Haran his deceased
brother, accompanied him; a circumstance which indicates that if the
family had formerly been idolatrous it had now received the faith of
Abraham. They first migrated to Haran, or Charran, in Mesopotamia, a
flat, barren region westward of Ur; and after a residence there of a few
years, during which Terah had died, Abraham left Haran to go into
Palestine, taking with him Sarah his wife, who had no child, and Lot,
with his paternal property. Nahor appears to have been left in Haran. To
this second migration he was incited also by a Divine command,
accompanied by the promises of a numerous issue, that his seed should
become a great nation, and, above all, that “in him all the families of
the earth should be blessed;” in other words, that the Messiah, known
among the patriarchs as the promised “seed of the woman,” should be born
in his line. Palestine was then inhabited by the Canaanites, from whom
it was called Canaan. Abraham, leading his tribe, first settled at
Sechem, a valley between the mountains Ebal and Gerizim, where God
appeared to him and promised to give him the land of Canaan, and where,
as in other places in which he remained any time, he built an altar to
the Lord. He then removed to a hilly region on the north of Jericho; and
as the pastures were exhausted, migrated southward, till a famine drove
him into Egypt, probably the earliest, certainly the most productive,
corn country of the ancient world.

2. Here it may be observed, that the migrations of Abraham and his sons
show the manner in which the earth was gradually covered with people. In
those ages some cities had been built, and the country to some extent
about them cultivated; but wide spaces of unoccupied land lay between
them. A part of society following therefore the pastoral life, led forth
their flocks, and, in large family tribes, of which the parent was the
head, uniting both the sovereign power and the priesthood in himself,
and with a train of servants attached to the tribe by hereditary ties,
pitched their camps wherever a fertile and unappropriated district
offered them pasture. A few of these nomadic tribes appear to have made
the circuit of the same region, seldom going far from their native
seats; which would probably have been the case with Abraham, had he not
received the call of God to depart to a distant country. Others, more
bold, followed the track of rivers, and the sweep of fertile valleys,
and at length some built cities and formed settlements in those distant
regions; whilst others, either from attachment to their former mode of
life, or from necessity, continued in their pastoral occupations, and
followed the supplies afforded for their flocks by the still expanding
regions of the fertile earth. Wars and violences, droughts, famines, and
the constant increase of population, continued to impel these
innumerable, but at first, small streams of men into parts still more
remote. Those who settled on the sea coast began to use that element,
both for supplying themselves with a new species of food, and as a
medium of communication by vessels with other countries for the
interchange of such commodities as their own lands afforded with those
offered by maritime states, more or less distant. Thus were laid the
foundations of commerce, and thus the maritime cities were gradually
rendered opulent and powerful. Colonies were in time transported from
them by means of their ships, and settled on the coasts of still more
distant and fertile countries. Thus the migrations of the three
primitive families proceeded from the central regions of Armenia,
Mesopotamia, and Assyria; and in succession they established numerous
communities,--the Phenicians, Arabians, Egyptians, Ethiopians, and
Lybians southward;--the Persians, Indians, and Chinese eastward;--the
Scythians, Celts, and Tartars northward;--and the Goths, Greeks, and
Latins westward, even as far as the Peruvians and Mexicans of South
America, and the Indians of North America.

3. Abraham, knowing the dissolute character of the Egyptians, directed
Sarah to call herself his sister, which she was, although by another
mother; fearing that if they knew her to be his wife, they would not
only seize her, but kill him. This circumstance indicates the vicious
state of morals and government in Egypt at this early period. In this
affair Abraham has been blamed for want of faith in God; but it was
perhaps no more than an act of common prudence, as the seraglio of the
Egyptian monarch was supplied by any means, however violent and lawless.
Sarah, upon the report of her beauty, was seized and taken into his
harem; and God sent great plagues upon his house, which, from their
extraordinary character, he concluded to be divine judgments. This led
to inquiry, and on discovering that he was detaining another man’s wife
by violence, he sent her back, and dismissed Abraham laden with
presents.

4. After the famine Abraham returned to Canaan, and pitched his tents
between Bethel and Hai, where he had previously raised an altar. Here,
as his flocks and herds, and those of Lot, had greatly increased, and
strifes had arisen between their herdsmen as to pasturage and water,
they peaceably separated. Lot returning to the plain of the Jordan,
which before the destruction of Sodom was as “the garden of God,” and
Abraham to Mamre, near Hebron, after receiving a renewal of the promise,
that God would give him the whole land for a possession. The separation
of Abraham and Lot still farther secured the unmingled descent of the
Abrahamitic family. The territories of the kings of the cities of the
plain were a few years afterward invaded by a confederacy of the petty
kings of the Euphrates and the neighbouring countries, and Lot and his
family were taken prisoners. This intelligence being brought to Abraham,
he collected the men of his tribe, three hundred and eighteen, and
falling upon the kings by night, near the fountains of Jericho, he
defeated them, retook the spoil, and recovered Lot. On his return,
passing near Salem, supposed to be the city afterward called Jerusalem,
he was blessed by its king Melchizedec, who was priest of the most high
God; so that the knowledge and worship of Jehovah had not quite departed
at that time from the Canaanitish nations. To him Abraham gave a tithe
of the spoil. The rest he generously restored to the king of Sodom,
refusing, in a noble spirit of independence, to retain so much as a
“shoe lachet,” except the portion which, by usage of war, fell to the
young native sheiks, Aner, Eschal, and Mamre, who had joined him in the
expedition.

5. After this he had another encouraging vision of God, Gen. xv, 1; and
to his complaint that he was still childless, and that his name and
property would descend to the stranger Eliezer, who held the next rank
in his tribe, the promise was given, that he himself should have a son,
and that his seed should be countless as the stars of heaven. And it is
emphatically added, “He believed in the Lord, and he counted it to him
for righteousness.” He was then fully assured, that he stood before God,
a pardoned and accepted man, “whose iniquities were forgiven,” and to
whom “the Lord did not impute sin.” Still the fulfilment of the promise
of a son was delayed; and Sarah, perhaps despairing that it would be
accomplished in her person, and the revelation which had been made
merely stating that this son should be the fruit of Abraham’s body,
without any reference to her, she gave to him, according to the custom
of those times, one of her handmaids, an Egyptian, to be his secondary
wife, who brought forth Ishmael. Children born in this manner had the
privileges of legitimacy; but fourteen years afterward, when Abraham was
a hundred years old, and Sarah ninety, the Lord appeared to him again,
established his covenant with him and with his seed, changed his name to
Abraham, “the father of many nations,” promised that Sarah herself
should bring forth the son to whom the preceding promises had referred;
instituted circumcision as the sign of the covenant; and changed the
name of his wife from Sarai, _my princess_, to Sarah, _the princess_,
that is, of many people to descend from her.

6. At this time Abraham occupied his former encampment near Hebron.
Here, as he sat in the door of his tent, three mysterious strangers
appeared. Abraham, with true Arabian hospitality, received and
entertained them. The chief of the three renewed the promise of a son to
be born from Sarah, a promise which she received with a laugh of
incredulity, for which she was mildly reproved. As Abraham accompanied
them toward the valley of the Jordan, the same divine person, for so he
manifestly appears, announced the dreadful ruin impending over the
licentious cities among which Lot had taken up his abode. No passage,
even in the sacred writings, exhibits a more exalted view of the divine
condescension than that in which Abraham is seen expostulating on the
apparent injustice of involving the innocent in the ruin of the guilty:
“Shall the city perish, if fifty, if forty-five, if forty, if thirty, if
twenty, if ten righteous men be found within its walls?” “Ten righteous
men shall avert its doom.” Such was the promise of the celestial
visitant; but the guilt was universal, the ruin inevitable; and the
violation of the sacred laws of hospitality and nature, which Lot in his
horror attempted to avert by the most revolting expedient, confirmed the
justice of the divine sentence.

7. Sarah having conceived, according to the divine promise, Abraham left
the plain of Mamre, and went south to Gerar, where Abimelech reigned;
and again fearing lest Sarah should be forced from him, and himself be
put to death, her beauty having been, it would appear, preternaturally
continued, notwithstanding her age, he here called her, as he had done
in Egypt, his sister. Abimelech took her to his house, designing to
marry her; but God having, in a dream, informed him that she was
Abraham’s wife, he returned her to him with great presents. This year
Sarah was delivered of Isaac; and Abraham circumcised him, according to
the covenant stipulation; and when he was weaned, made a great
entertainment. Sarah, having observed Ishmael, son of Hagar, mocking her
son Isaac, said to Abraham, “Cast out this bondwoman and her son, for
Ishmael shall not be heir with Isaac.” After great reluctance, Abraham
complied; God having informed him that this was according to the
appointments of his providence, with respect to future ages. About the
same time, Abimelech came with Phicol, his general, to conclude an
alliance with Abraham, who made that prince a present of seven ewe lambs
out of his flock, in confirmation that a well he had opened should be
his own property; and they called the place Beer-sheba, or “the well of
swearing,” because of the covenant there ratified with oaths. Here
Abraham planted a grove, built an altar, and for some time resided, Gen.
xx, xxi.

8. More than twenty years after this, (A. M. 2133,) God, for the final
trial and illustration of Abraham’s faith, directed him to offer up his
son Isaac. Abraham took his son, and two servants, and went toward mount
Moriah. When within sight of the mountain, Abraham left his servants,
and ascended it with his son only; and there having bound him, he
prepared for the affecting sacrifice; but when he was about to give the
blow, an angel from heaven cried out to him, “Lay not thine hand upon
the lad, neither do thou any thing to him. Now I know that thou fearest
God, since thou hast not withheld thine only son from me.” Abraham,
turning, saw a ram entangled in the bush by his horns; and he offered
this animal as a burnt offering, instead of his son Isaac. This
memorable place he called by the prophetic name, _Jehovah-jireh_, or
_the Lord will see_--or _provide_, Gen. xxii, 1–14, having respect, no
doubt, to the true sacrifice which, in the fulness of time, was to be
offered for the whole world upon the same mountain.

9. Twelve years afterward, Sarah, wife of Abraham, died in Hebron.
Abraham came to mourn and to perform the funeral offices for her. He
addressed the people at the city gate, entreating them to allow him to
bury his wife among them; for, being a stranger, and having no land of
his own, he could claim no right of interment in any sepulchre of that
country. He, therefore, bought of Ephron, one of the inhabitants, the
field of Machpelah, with the cave and sepulchre in it, at the price of
four hundred shekels of silver, about forty-five pounds sterling. And
here Abraham buried Sarah, with due solemnities, according to the custom
of the country, Gen. xxiii. This whole transaction impressively
illustrates the dignity, courtesy, and honour of these ancient chiefs;
and wholly disproves the notion that theirs was a rude and unpolished
age.

10. Abraham, having grown old, sent Eliezer, his steward, into
Mesopotamia, with directions to obtain a young woman of his own family,
as a wife for his son Isaac. Eliezer executed his commission with
fidelity, and brought back Rebecca, daughter of Bethuel, grand-daughter
of Nahor, and, consequently, Abraham’s niece, whom Isaac married.
Abraham afterward married Keturah; by whom he had six sons, Zimran,
Jokshan, Medan, Midian, Ishbak, and Shuah; who became heads of different
people, which dwelt in Arabia, and around it. He died, aged a hundred
and seventy-five years, and was buried, with Sarah his wife, in the cave
of Machpelah, which he had purchased of Ephron, Gen. xxiv, xxv, A. M.
2183, before Christ 1821.

II. From the personal history of Abraham we may now proceed to the
consideration of the TYPICAL circumstances which were connected with it.

1. Abraham himself with his family may be regarded as a type of the
church of God in future ages. They indeed constituted God’s ancient
church. Not that many scattered patriarchal and family churches did not
remain: such was that of Melchizedec; and such probably was that of
Nahor, whom Abraham left behind in Mesopotamia. But a visible church
relation was established between Abraham’s family and the Most High,
signified by the visible and distinguishing sacrament of circumcision,
and followed by new and enlarged revelations of truth. Two purposes were
to be answered by this,--_the preservation of the true doctrine of
salvation in the world_, which is the great and solemn duty of every
branch of the church of God,--and _the manifestation of that truth to
others_. Both were done by Abraham. Wherever he sojourned he built his
altars to the true God, and publicly celebrated his worship; and, as we
learn from St. Paul, he lived in tents in preference to settling in the
land of Canaan, though it had been given to him for a possession, in
order that he might thus proclaim his faith in the eternal inheritance
of which Canaan was a type; and in bearing this testimony, his example
was followed by Isaac and Jacob, the “heirs with him of the same
promise,” who also thus “confessed that they were strangers and
pilgrims,” and that “they looked” for a continuing and eternal city in
heaven. So also now is the same doctrine of immortality committed to the
church of Christ; and by deadness to the world ought its members to
declare the reality of their own faith in it.

2. The numerous natural posterity promised to Abraham was also a type of
the spiritual seed, the true members of the church of Christ, springing
from the Messiah, of whom Isaac was the symbol. Thus St. Paul expressly
distinguishes between the fleshly and the spiritual seed of Abraham; to
the latter of which, in their ultimate and highest sense, the promises
of increase as the stars of heaven, and the sands of the sea shore, are
to be referred, as also the promise of the heavenly Canaan.

3. The intentional offering up Isaac, with its result, was probably that
transaction in which Abraham, more clearly than in any other, “saw the
day of Christ, and was glad.” He received Isaac from the dead, says St.
Paul, “in a figure.” This could be a figure of nothing but the
resurrection of our Lord; and, if so, Isaac’s being laid upon the altar
was a figure of his sacrificial death, scenically and most impressively
represented to Abraham. The _place_, the same ridge of hills on which
our Lord was crucified; the _person_, an only son, to die for no offence
of his own; the _sacrificer_, a father; the _receiving back_, as it
were, from death to life; the _name_ impressed upon the place,
importing, “_the Lord will provide_,” in allusion to Abraham’s own words
to Isaac, “the Lord will provide a lamb for a burnt offering;” all
indicate a mystery which lay deep beneath this transaction, and which
Abraham, as the reward of his obedience, was permitted to behold. “The
day” of Christ’s humiliation and exaltation was thus opened to him; and
served to keep the great truth in mind, that the true burnt offering and
sacrifice for sin was to be something higher than the immolation of
lambs and bulls and goats,--nay, something more than what was _merely_
human.

4. The transaction of the expulsion of Hagar was also a type. It was an
allegory in action, by which St. Paul teaches us to understand that the
son of the bondwoman represented those who are under the law; and the
child of the freewoman those who by faith in Christ are supernaturally
begotten into the family of God. The bondwoman and her son being cast
out, represented also the expulsion of the unbelieving Jews from the
church of God, which was to be composed of true believers of all
nations, all of whom, whether Jews or Gentiles, were to become “fellow
heirs.”

III. But Abraham appears before us invested with a MYSTIC character,
which it is of great importance rightly to understand.

1. He is to be regarded as standing in a _federal_ or _covenant_
relation, not only to his natural seed, but specially and eminently to
all believers. “The Gospel,” we are told by St. Paul, “was preached to
Abraham, saying, In thee shall all nations be blessed.” “Abraham
believed in God, and it was accounted to him for righteousness;” in
other words, he was justified. A covenant of gratuitous justification
through faith was made with him and his believing descendants; and the
rite of circumcision, which was not confined to his posterity by Sarah,
but appointed in every branch of his family, was the sign or sacrament
of this covenant of grace, and so remained till it was displaced by the
sacraments appointed by Christ. Wherever that sign was it declared the
doctrine, and offered the grace, of this covenant--free justification by
faith, and its glorious results--to all the tribes that proceeded from
Abraham. This same grace is offered to us by the Gospel, who become
“Abraham’s _seed_,” his spiritual children with whom the covenant is
established, through the same faith, and are thus made “the heirs with
him of the same promise.”

2. Abraham is also exhibited to us as the _representative_ of true
believers; and in this especially, that the true nature of faith was
exhibited in him. This great principle was marked in Abraham with the
following characters:--An entire unhesitating belief in the word of
God;--an unfaltering trust in all his promises;--a steady regard to his
almighty power, leading him to overlook all apparent difficulties and
impossibilities in every case where God had explicitly promised;--and
habitual and cheerful and entire obedience. The Apostle has described
faith in Heb. xi, 1; and that faith is seen living and acting in all its
energy in Abraham.

A few miscellaneous remarks are suggested by some of the circumstances
of Abraham’s history:--

1. The ancient method of ratifying a covenant by sacrifice is
illustrated in the account given in Gen. xv, 9, 10. The beasts were
slain and _divided_ in the midst, and the persons covenanting passed
between the parts. Hence, after Abraham had performed this part of the
ceremony, the symbol of the Almighty’s presence, “a smoking furnace, and
a burning lamp, passed between the pieces,” verse 18, and so both
parties ratified the covenant.

2. As the beauty of Sarah, which she retained so long as quite to
conceal her real age from observers, attracted so much notice as to lead
to her forcible seizure, once by Pharaoh in Egypt, and again by
Abimelech in Palestine, it may appear strange, that, as in the east
women are generally kept in seclusion, and seldom appear without veils,
she exposed herself to observation. But to this day the Arab women do
not wear veils at home in their tents; and Sarah’s countenance might
have been seen in the tent by some of the officers of Pharaoh and
Abimelech, who reported her beauty to their masters.

3. The intentional offering up of Isaac is not to be supposed as viewed
by Abraham as an act sanctioned by the Pagan practice of human
sacrifice. The immolation of human victims, particularly of that which
was most precious, the favourite, the first-born child, appears to have
been a common usage among many early nations, more especially the tribes
by which Abraham was surrounded. It was the distinguishing rite among
the worshippers of Moloch; at a later period of the Jewish history, it
was practised by a king of Moab; and it was undoubtedly derived by the
Carthaginians from their Phenecian ancestors on the shores of Syria.
Where it was an ordinary usage, as in the worship of Moloch, it was in
unison with the character of the religion, and of its deity. It was the
last act of a dark and sanguinary superstition, which rose by regular
gradation to this complete triumph over human nature. The god, who was
propitiated by these offerings, had been satiated with more cheap and
vulgar victims; he had been glutted to the full with human suffering and
with human blood. In general it was the final mark of the subjugation of
the national mind to an inhuman and domineering priesthood. But the
Mosaic religion held human sacrifices in abhorrence; and the God of the
Abrahamitic family, uniformly beneficent, had imposed no duties which
entailed human suffering, had demanded no offerings which were repugnant
to the better feelings of our nature. The command to offer Isaac as “a
burnt offering,” was for these reasons a trial the more severe to
Abraham’s faith. He must therefore have been fully assured of the divine
command; and he left the mystery to be explained by God himself. His was
a simple act of unhesitating obedience to the command of God; the last
proof of perfect reliance on the certain accomplishment of the divine
promises. Isaac, so miraculously bestowed, could be as miraculously
restored; Abraham, such is the comment of the Christian Apostle,
“believed that God could even raise him up from the dead.”

4. The wide and deep impression made by the character of Abraham upon
the ancient world is proved by the reverence which people of almost all
nations and countries have paid to him, and the manner in which the
events of his life have been interwoven in their mythology, and their
religious traditions. Jews, Magians, Sabians, Indians, and Mohammedans
have claimed him as the great patriarch and founder of their several
sects; and his history has been embellished with a variety of fictions.
One of the most pleasing of these is the following, but it proceeds upon
the supposition that he was educated in idolatry: “As Abraham was
walking by night from the grotto where he was born, to the city of
Babylon, he gazed on the stars of heaven, and among them on the
beautiful planet Venus. ‘Behold,’ said he within himself, ‘the God and
Lord of the universe!’ but the star set and disappeared, and Abraham
felt that the Lord of the universe could not thus be liable to change.
Shortly after, he beheld the moon at the full: ‘Lo,’ he cried, ‘the
Divine Creator, the manifest Deity!’ but the moon sank below the
horizon, and Abraham made the same reflection as at the setting of the
evening star. All the rest of the night he passed in profound
rumination; at sunrise he stood before the gates of Babylon, and saw the
whole people prostrate in adoration. ‘Wondrous orb,‘ he exclaimed, ‘thou
surely art the Creator and Ruler of all nature! but thou, too, hastest
like the rest to thy setting!--neither then art thou my Creator, my
Lord, or my God!’”

ABRAHAMITES, reported heretical sects of the eighth and ninth centuries,
charged with the Paulician errors, and some of them with idolatry. For
these charges we have, however, only the word of their persecutors. Also
the name of a sect in Bohemia, as late as 1782, who professed the
religion of Abraham before his circumcision, and admitted no scriptures
but the decalogue and the Lord’s prayer. As these were persecuted, they
too were probably misrepresented, and especially as their conduct is
allowed to have been good, even by their enemies.

ABSALOM, the son of David by Maachah, daughter of the king of Geshur;
distinguished for his fine person, his vices, and his unnatural
rebellion. Of his open revolt, his conduct in Jerusalem, his pursuit of
the king his father, his defeat and death, see 2 Sam. xvi-xviii, at
large.

ABSOLUTION, in the church of Rome, is a sacrament, in which the priests
assume the power of forgiving sins. The rite of absolution in the church
of England is acknowledged to be declarative only--“Almighty God hath
given power and commandment to his ministers to declare and pronounce to
his people, being penitent, the absolution and remission of their sins:
He pardoneth,” &c. In this view it is innocent; and although any private
Christian has a right to declare and pronounce the same doctrine to his
neighbour, the _official_ publication of the grace of the Gospel is the
public duty of its ministers in the congregation, since they are
Christ’s “ambassadors.”

ABSTINENCE, forbearance of any thing It is generally used with reference
to forbearance from food under a religious motive. The Jewish law
ordained that the priests should abstain from the use of wine during the
whole time of their being employed in the service of the temple, Lev. x,
9. The same abstinence was enjoined upon the Nazarites, during the time
of their Nazariteship, or separation, Num. vi, 3. The Jews were
commanded to abstain from several sorts of animals. See ANIMAL.

The fat of all sorts of animals that were sacrificed was forbidden to be
eaten, Lev. iii, 17; vii, 23; and the blood of every animal, in general,
was prohibited under pain of death. Indeed blood was forbidden by the
Creator, from the time of the grant of the flesh of beasts to man for
food; this prohibition was continued under the Jewish economy, and
transmitted to the Christian church by Apostolic authority, Acts xv, 28,
29. (See _Blood_.) The Jews also abstained from the sinew which is upon
the hollow of the thigh, Gen. xxxii, 25; because of the shrinking of the
sinew of Jacob’s thigh when touched by the angel, as though by that the
part had been made sacred.

Among the primitive Christians, some denied themselves the use of such
meats as were prohibited by the law; others treated this abstinence with
contempt. St. Paul has given his decision on these questions in his
epistles, 1 Cor. viii, 7–10; Rom. xiv, 1–3. The council of Jerusalem,
which was held by the Apostles, enjoined the Christian converts to
abstain from meats strangled, from blood, from fornication, and from
idolatry, Acts xv, 20.

The spiritual monarchy of the western world introduced another sort of
abstinence which may be termed _ritual_, and which consists in
abstaining from particular meats at certain times and seasons, the rules
of which are called rogations. The ancient Lent was observed only a few
days before Easter. In the course of the third century, it extended at
Rome to three weeks; and before the middle of the succeeding age, it was
prolonged to six weeks, and began to be called quadragesima, or the
forty days’ fast.

ABYSS, or DEEP, ἄβυσσος, _without bottom_. The chaos; the deepest parts
of the sea; and, in the New Testament, the place of the dead, Rom. x, 7;
a deep place of punishment. The devils besought Jesus that he would not
send them into the abyss, a place they evidently dreaded, Luke viii, 31;
where it seems to mean that part of Hades in which wicked spirits are in
torment. See HELL.

In the opinion of the ancient Hebrews, and of the generality of eastern
people at this day, the abyss, the sea, or waters, encompassed the whole
earth. This was supposed to float upon the abyss, of which it covered a
small part. According to the same notion, the earth was founded on the
waters, or at least its foundations were on the abyss beneath, Psalm
xxiv, 2; cxxxvi, 6. Under these waters, and at the bottom of this abyss,
they represented the wicked as groaning, and suffering the punishment of
their sin. The Rephaim were confined there, those old giants, who,
whilst living, caused surrounding nations to tremble, Prov. ix, 18; xxi,
16, &c. Lastly, in these dark dungeons the kings of Tyre, Babylon, and
Egypt are described by the Prophets as suffering the punishment of their
pride and cruelty, Isaiah xxvi, 14; Ezek. xxviii, 10, &c.

These depths are figuratively represented as the abodes of evil spirits,
and powers opposed to God: “I saw,” says St. John, “a star fall from
heaven unto the earth, and to him was given the key of the bottomless
pit. And he opened the bottomless pit; and there arose a smoke out of
it, as the smoke of a great furnace; and the sun and the air were
darkened by reason of the smoke of the pit. And there came out of the
smoke locusts upon the earth. And they had a king over them, which is
the angel of the bottomless pit,” Rev. ix, 1, 2, 11. In another place,
the beast is represented as ascending out of the bottomless pit, and
waging war against the two witnesses of God, Rev. xi, 7. Lastly, St.
John says, “I saw an angel come down from heaven, having the key of the
bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand. And he laid hold on the
dragon, that old serpent, which is the devil, and Satan, and bound him a
thousand years, and cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut him up,
and set a seal upon him, that he should deceive the nations no more till
the thousand years should be fulfilled: and after that he must be loosed
a little season,” Rev. xx, 1–3.

ABYSSINIAN CHURCH, a branch of the Coptic church, in Upper Ethiopia. The
Abyssinians, by the most authentic accounts, were converted to the
Christian faith about the year 330; when Frumentius, being
providentially raised to a high office, under the patronage of the queen
of Ethiopia, and ordained bishop of that country by Athanasius,
patriarch of Alexandria, established Christianity, built churches, and
ordained a regular clergy to officiate in them. The Abyssinian
Christians themselves, indeed, claim a much higher antiquity, having a
tradition, that the doctrine of Christ was first introduced among them
by Queen Candace, Acts viii, 27; or even preached there by the Apostles
Matthew and Bartholomew; but the former is supported by no collateral
evidence, and the latter is in opposition to high authority. Some of
them claim relation to the Israelites, through the queen of Sheba, so
far back as the reign of Solomon.

The Abyssinian Christians have always received their abuna, or
patriarch, from Alexandria, whence they sprang, and consequently their
creed is Monophysite, or Eutychian; maintaining one nature only in the
person of Christ, namely, the divine, in which they considered all the
properties of the humanity to be absorbed; in opposition to the
Nestorians.

On the power of the Saracens prevailing in the east, all communication
being nearly cut off between the eastern and western churches, the
Abyssinian church remained unknown in Europe till nearly the close of
the fifteenth century, when John II, of Portugal, accidentally hearing
of the existence of such a church, sent to make inquiry. This led to a
correspondence between the Abyssinians and the church of Rome; and
Bermudes, a Portuguese, was consecrated by the pope patriarch of
Ethiopia, and the Abyssinians were required to receive the Roman
Catholic faith, in return for some military assistance afforded to the
emperor. Instead of this, however, the emperor sent for a new patriarch
from Alexandria, imprisoned Bermudes, and declared the pope a heretic.

About the middle of the sixteenth century, the Jesuits attempted a
mission to Abyssinia, in the hope of reducing it to the pope’s
authority; but without success. In 1588 a second mission was attempted,
and so far succeeded as to introduce a system of persecution, which cost
many lives, and caused many troubles to the empire. In the following
century, however, the Jesuits were all expelled, Abyssinia returned to
its ancient faith, and nothing more was heard of the church of
Abyssinia, till the latter part of the last century.

After the expulsion of the Jesuits, all Europeans were interdicted; nor
does it appear that any one dared to attempt an entrance until the
celebrated Mr. Bruce, by the report of his medical skill, contrived to
introduce himself to the court, where he even obtained military
promotion; and was in such repute, that it was with great difficulty he
obtained leave to return to England.

Encouraged, perhaps, by this circumstance, the Moravian brethren
attempted a mission to this country, but in vain. They were compelled to
retreat to Grand Cairo, from whence, by leave of the patriarch, they
visited the Copts at Behrusser, and formed a small society; but in 1783,
they were driven thence, and compelled to return to Europe. More
recently, however, the late king of Abyssinia (Itsa Takley Gorges)
addressed a letter to Mr. Salt, the British consul in Egypt, and
requested copies of some parts of both the Old and New Testaments.
Copies of the Psalms, in Ethiopic, as printed by the British and Foreign
Bible Society, were also sent to him.

ACADEMICS, a name given to such philosophers as adopted the doctrines of
Plato. They were so called from the _Academia_, a grove near Athens,
where they frequently indulged their contemplations. Academia is said to
derive its name from one Academus, a god or hero so called. Thus
Horace,--

          _Atque inter sylvas Academi quærere verum._
          [And in the groves of Academus to search for truth.]

The academics are divided into those of the first academy, who taught
the doctrines of Plato in their original purity; those of the second or
middle academy, who differed materially from the first, and inclined to
skepticism; and those of the new academy. The middle school laid it down
as a principle, that neither our senses, nor our reason, are to be
trusted; but that in common affairs we are to conform to received
opinions. The new academy maintained that we have no means of
distinguishing truth, and that the most evident appearances may lead us
into error; they granted the wise man opinion, but denied him certainty.
They held, however, that it was best to follow the greatest probability,
which was sufficient for all the useful purposes of life, and laid down
rules for the attainment of felicity. The difference betwixt the middle
academy and the new seems to have been this, that though they agreed in
the imbecility of human nature, yet the first denied that probabilities
were of any use in the pursuit of happiness; and the latter held them to
be of service in such a design: the former recommended a conformity with
received opinions, and the latter allowed men an opinion of their own.
In the first academy, Speusippus filled the chair; in the second,
Arcesilaus; and in the new or third academy, Carneades.

ACCAD, one of the four cities built by Nimrod, the founder of the
Assyrian empire. (See _Nimrod_.) “And the beginning of his kingdom was
Babel, and Erech, and Accad, and Calneh, in the land of Shinar,” Gen. x,
10. Thus it appears that Accad was contemporary with Babylon, and was
one of the first four great cities of the world.

It would scarcely be expected that any thing should now remain to guide
us in our search for this ancient city, seeing that Babylon itself, with
which it was coeval, is reduced to heaps; and that it is not mentioned
under its ancient name by any profane author. But the discoveries of
modern travellers may be brought to aid us in our inquiry. At the
distance of about six miles from the modern town of Bagdad, is found a
mound, surmounted by a tower-shaped ruin, called by the Arabs Tell
Nimrood, and by the Turks Nemrood Tepasse; both terms implying the Hill
of Nimrod. This gigantic mass rises in an irregularly pyramidal or
turreted shape, according to the view in which it is taken, one hundred
and twenty-five or one hundred and thirty feet above the gently inclined
elevation on which it stands. Its circumference, at the bottom, is three
hundred feet. The mound which constitutes its foundation is composed of
a collection of rubbish, formed from the decay of the superstructure;
and consists of sandy earth, fragments of burnt brick, pottery, and hard
clay, partially vitrified. In the remains of the tower, the different
layers of sun-dried brick, of which it is composed, may be traced with
great precision. These bricks, cemented together by slime, and divided
into courses varying from twelve to twenty feet in height, are separated
from one another by a stratum of reeds, similar to those now growing in
the marshy parts of the plain, and in a wonderful state of preservation.
The resemblance of this mode of building to that in some of the
structures at Babylon, cannot escape observation; and we may reasonably
conclude it to be the workmanship of the same architects. The solidity
and the loftiness of this pile, unfashioned to any other purpose,
bespeak it to be one of those enormous pyramidal towers which were
consecrated to the Sabian worship; which, as essential to their
religious rites, were probably erected in all the early cities of the
Cuthites; and, like their prototype at Babylon, answered the double
purpose of altars and observatories. Here then was the site of one of
these early cities. It was not Babylon; it was not Erech; it was not
Calneh. It might be too much to say that _therefore_ it must be Accad;
but the inference is at least warrantable; which is farther strengthened
by the name of the place, Akarkouff; which bears a greater affinity to
that of Accad than many others which are forced into the support of
geographical speculations, especially when it is recollected that the
Syrian name of the city was Achar.

ACCESS, free admission, open entrance. Our access to God is by Jesus
Christ, the way, the truth, and the life, Rom. v, 2; Eph. ii, 18. Under
the law, the high priest alone had access into the holiest of all; but
when the veil of the temple was rent in twain, at the death of Christ,
it was declared that a new and living way of access was laid open
through the veil, that is to say, his flesh. By his death, also, the
middle wall of partition was broken down, and Jew and Gentile had both
free access to God; whereas, before, the Gentiles had no nearer access
in the temple worship than to the gate of the court of Israel. Thus the
saving grace and lofty privileges of the Gospel are equally bestowed
upon true believers of all nations.

ACCHO, afterward called Ptolemais, and now Akka by the Arabs, and Acre
by the Turks. It was given to the tribe of Asher, Judges i, 31.
Christianity was planted here at an early period, and here St. Paul
visited the saints in his way to Jerusalem, Acts xxi, 7. It is a seaport
of Palestine, thirty miles south of Tyre, and, in the first partition of
the holy land, belonged to the tribe of Asher; but this was one of the
places out of which the Israelites could not drive the primitive
inhabitants. In succeeding times it was enlarged by the first Ptolemy,
to whose lot it fell, and who named it after himself, Ptolemais.

This city, now called Acre, which, from the convenience of its port, is
one of the most considerable on the Syrian coast, was, during almost two
centuries, the principal theatre of the holy wars, and the frequent
scene of the perfidies and treacheries of the crusaders.

Among its antiquities, Dr. E. D. Clarke describes the remains of a very
considerable edifice, exhibiting a conspicuous appearance among the
buildings on the north side of the city. “In this structure the style of
the architecture is of the kind we call Gothic. Perhaps it has on that
account borne among our countrymen the appellation of ‘King Richard’s
Palace,’ although, in the period to which the tradition refers, the
English were hardly capable of erecting palaces, or any other buildings
of equal magnificence. Two lofty arches, and part of the cornice, are
all that now remain to attest the former greatness of the
superstructure. The cornice, ornamented with enormous stone busts,
exhibiting a series of hideous distorted countenances, whose features
are in no instances alike, may either have served as allusions to the
decapitation of St. John, or were intended for a representation of the
heads of Saracens suspended as trophies upon the walls.” Maundrell and
Pococke consider this building to have been the church of St. Andrew;
but Dr. E. D. Clarke thinks it was that of St. John, erected by the
Knights of Jerusalem, whence the city changed its name of Ptolemais for
that of St. John d’Acre. He also considers the style of architecture to
be in some degree the original of our ornamented Gothic, before its
translation from the holy land to Italy, France, and England.

Mr. Buckingham, who visited Acre in 1816, says, “Of the Canaanitish
Accho it would be thought idle perhaps to seek for remains; yet some
presented themselves to my observation so peculiar in form and
materials, and of such high antiquity, as to leave no doubt in my own
mind of their being the fragments of buildings constructed in the
earliest ages.

“Of the splendour of Ptolemais, no perfect monument remains; but
throughout the town are seen shafts of red and grey granite, and marble
pillars. The Saracenic remains are only to be partially traced in the
inner walls of the town; which have themselves been so broken down and
repaired, as to leave little visible of the original work; and all the
mosques, fountains, bazaars, and other public buildings, are in a style
rather Turkish than Arabic, excepting only an old, but regular and
well-built khan or caravanserai, which might perhaps be attributed to
the Saracen age. The Christian ruins are altogether gone, scarcely
leaving a trace of the spot on which they stood.”

Acre has been rendered famous in our own times by the successful
resistance made by our countryman Sir Sydney Smith, aided by the
celebrated Djezzar Pasha, to the progress of the French under
Buonaparte. Since this period, the fortifications have been considerably
increased; and although to the eye of an engineer they may still be very
defective, Acre may be considered as the strongest place in Palestine.

Mr. Conner says, on the authority of the English consul, that there are
about ten thousand inhabitants in Acre, of whom three thousand are
Turks, and the remainder Christians, chiefly Catholics.

ACCUBATION, the posture used at table by the ancients. The old Romans
sat at meat as we do, till the Grecian luxury and softness had corrupted
them. The same custom, of lying upon couches at their entertainments,
prevailed among the Jews also in our Saviour’s time; for having been
lately conquered by Pompey, they conformed in this, and in many other
respects, to the example of their masters. The manner of lying at meat
among the Romans, Greeks, and more modern Jews, was the same in all
respects. The table was placed in the middle of the room, around which
stood three couches covered with cloth or tapestry, according to the
quality of the master of the house; upon these they lay, inclining the
superior part of their bodies upon their left arms, the lower part being
stretched out at full length, or a little bent. Their heads were
supported and raised with pillows. The first man lay at the head of the
couch; the next man lay with his head toward the feet of the other, from
which he was defended by the bolster that supported his own back,
commonly reaching over to the middle of the first man; and the rest
after the same manner. The most honourable place was the _middle_
couch--and the _middle_ of _that_. Favourites commonly lay in the bosom
of their friends; that is, they were placed next below them: see John
xiii, 23, where St. John is said to have lain in our Saviour’s bosom.
The ancient Greeks sat at the table; for Homer observes that when
Ulysses arrived at the palace of Alcinous, the king dispatched his son
Laodamas to seat Ulysses in a magnificent chair. The Egyptians sat at
table anciently, as well as the Romans, till toward the end of the Punic
war, when they began to recline at table.

ACCURSED, in the Scriptures, signifies that which is separated or
devoted. With regard to persons, it denotes the cutting off or
separating any one from the communion of the church, the number of the
living, or the privileges of society; and also the devoting an animal,
city, or other thing to destruction. _Anathema_ was a species of
_excommunication_ among the Jews, and was often practised after they had
lost the power of life and death, against those persons who, according
to the Mosaic law, ought to have been executed. A criminal, after the
sentence of excommunication was pronounced, became _anathema_: and they
had a full persuasion that the sentence would not be in vain; but that
God would interfere to punish the offender in a manner similar to the
penalty of the law of Moses: a man, for instance, whom the law condemned
to be stoned, would, they believed, be killed by the falling of a stone
upon him; a man to be hanged, would be choked; and one whom the law
sentenced to the flames, would be burnt in his house, &c. _Maranatha_, a
Syriac word, signifying _the Lord cometh_, was added to the sentence, to
express their persuasion that the Lord God would come to take vengeance
upon that guilt which they, circumstanced as they were, had not the
power to punish, 1 Cor. xvi, 22.

According to the idiom of the Hebrew language, _accursed_ and
_crucified_ were synonymous terms. By the Jews every one who died upon a
tree was reckoned _accursed_, Deut. xxi, 23.

Excommunication is a kind of anathema also among some Christians; and by
it the offender is deprived, not only of communicating in prayers and
other holy offices, but of admittance to the church, and of conversation
with the faithful. The spirit of Judaism, rather than that of the
Gospel, has in this been imitated; for among the Hebrews, they who were
excommunicated could not perform any public duty of their employments;
could be neither judges nor witnesses; neither be present at funerals,
nor circumcise their own sons, nor sit down in the company of other men,
nearer than within the distance of four cubits. If they died under
excommunication, they were denied the rites of burial; and a large stone
was left on their graves, or a heap of stones was thrown over them, as
over Achan, Joshua vii, 26. The Apostolical excommunication was simply
to deny to the offender, after admonition, the right of partaking of the
Lord’s Supper, which was excision from the church of Christ.

ACELDAMA, a piece of ground without the south wall of Jerusalem, on the
other side of the brook Siloam. It was called the Potter’s Field,
because an earth or clay was dug in it, of which pottery was made. It
was likewise called the Fuller’s Field, because cloth was dried in it.
But it having been afterward bought with the money by which the high
priest and rulers of the Jews purchased the blood of Jesus, it was
called Aceldama, or the Field of Blood.

ACHAIA. This name is used to denote the whole of Greece, as it existed
as a Roman province; or Achaia Proper, a district in the northern part
of the Peloponnesus, on the bay of Corinth, and in which the city of
that name stood. It appears to have been used in the former sense in 2
Cor. xi, 10; and in the latter, in Acts xix, 21.

ACHAN, the son of Carmi, of the tribe of Judah, who having taken a part
of the spoils of Jericho, against the injunction of God, who had
_accursed_ or devoted the whole city, was, upon being taken by lot,
doomed to be stoned to death. The whole history is recorded, Joshua vii.
It would appear that Achan’s family were also stoned; for they were led
out with him, and all his property, “And all Israel stoned him with
stones, and burned them with fire, after they had stoned them with
stones.” Some of the critics have made efforts to confine the stoning to
Achan, and the burning to his goods; but not without violence to the
text. It is probable, therefore, that his family were privy to the
theft, seeing he hid the accursed things which he had stolen in the
earth, in his tent. By concealment they therefore became partakers of
his crime, and so the sentence was justified.

ACHMETHA. See ECBATANA.

ACHOR, Valley of, between Jericho and Ai. So called from the trouble
brought upon the Israelites by the sin of Achan; Achor in the Hebrew
denoting trouble.

ACHZIB, a city on the coast of the Mediterranean, in the tribe of Asher,
and one of the cities out of which that tribe did not expel the
inhabitants, Judges i, 31. It was called Ecdippa by the Greeks, and is
at present termed Zib. It is situated about ten miles north of Accho, or
Ptolemais. Mr. Buckingham, who passed by this place, says that it is
small, and situated on a hill near the sea; having a few palm trees
rearing themselves above its dwellings.

ACRA, Ἄκρα. This Greek word signifies, in general, _a citadel_. The
Syrians and Chaldeans use הקרא, in the same sense. King Antiochus gave
orders for building a citadel at Jerusalem, north of the temple, on an
eminence, which commanded the holy place; and for that reason was called
Acra. Josephus says, that this eminence was semicircular, and that Simon
Maccabæus, having expelled the Syrians, who had seized Acra, demolished
it, and spent three years in levelling the mountain on which it stood;
that no situation in future should command the temple. On mount Acra
were afterward built, the palace of Helena; Agrippa’s palace, the place
where the public records were lodged; and that where the magistrates of
Jerusalem assembled.

ACRABATENE, a district of Judæa, extending between Shechem (now
Napolose) and Jericho, inclining east. It was about twelve miles in
length. The Acrabatene had its name from a place called Akrabbim, about
nine miles from Shechem, eastward. This was also the name of another
district of Judea on the frontier of Idumea, toward the northern
extremity of the Dead Sea.

ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. This book, in the very beginning, professes itself
to be a continuation of the Gospel of St. Luke; and its style bespeaks
it to be written by the same person. The external evidence is also very
satisfactory; for besides allusions in earlier authors, and particularly
in Clement of Rome, Polycarp, and Justin Martyr, the Acts of the
Apostles are not only quoted by Irenæus, as written by Luke the
evangelist, but there are few things recorded in this book which are not
mentioned by that ancient father. This strong testimony in favour of the
genuineness of the Acts of the Apostles is supported by Clement of
Alexandria, Tertullian, Jerome, Eusebius, Theodoret, and most of the
later fathers. It may be added, that the name of St. Luke is prefixed to
this book in several ancient Greek manuscripts of the New Testament, and
also in the old Syriac version.

2. This is the only inspired work which gives us any historical account
of the progress of Christianity after our Saviour’s ascension. It
comprehends a period of about thirty years, but it by no means contains
a general history of the church during that time. The principal facts
recorded in it are, the choice of Matthias to be an Apostle in the room
of the traitor Judas; the descent of the Holy Ghost on the day of
pentecost; the preaching, miracles, and sufferings of the Apostles at
Jerusalem; the death of Stephen, the first martyr; the persecution and
dispersion of the Christians; the preaching of the Gospel in different
parts of Palestine, especially in Samaria; the conversion of St. Paul;
the call of Cornelius, the first Gentile convert; the persecution of the
Christians by Herod Agrippa; the preaching of Paul and Barnabas to the
Gentiles, by the express command of the Holy Ghost; the decree made at
Jerusalem, declaring that circumcision, and a conformity to other Jewish
rites and ceremonies, were not necessary in Gentile converts; and the
latter part of the book is confined to the history of St. Paul, of whom
St. Luke was the constant companion for several years.

3. As this account of St. Paul is not continued beyond his two years’
imprisonment at Rome, it is probable that this book was written soon
after his release, which happened in the year 63; we may therefore
consider the Acts of the Apostles as written about the year 64.

4. The place of its publication is more doubtful. The probability
appears to be in favour of Greece, though some contend for Alexandria in
Egypt. This latter opinion rests upon the subscriptions at the end of
some Greek manuscripts, and of the copies of the Syriac version; but the
best critics think, that these subscriptions, which are also affixed to
other books of the New Testament, deserve but little weight; and in this
case they are not supported by any ancient authority.

5. It must have been of the utmost importance in the early times of the
Gospel, and certainly not of less importance to every subsequent age, to
have an authentic account of the promised descent of the Holy Ghost, and
of the success which attended the first preachers of the Gospel both
among the Jews and Gentiles. These great events completed the evidence
of the divine mission of Christ, established the truth of the religion
which he taught, and pointed out in the clearest manner the
comprehensive nature of the redemption which he purchased by his death.

Œcumenius calls the Acts, the “Gospel of the Holy Ghost;” and St.
Chrysostom, the “Gospel of our Saviour’s resurrection,” or the Gospel of
Jesus Christ risen from the dead. Here, in the lives and preaching of
the Apostles, we have the most miraculous instances of the power of the
Holy Ghost; and in the account of those who were the first believers, we
have received the most excellent pattern of the true Christian life.

ADAM, the name given to man in general, both male and female in the
Hebrew Scriptures, Gen. i, 26, 27; v, 1, 2; xi, 5; Josh. xiv, 15; 2 Sam.
vii, 19; Eccl. iii, 21; Jer. xxxii, 20; Hosea vi, 7; Zech. xiii, 7: in
all which places mankind is understood; but particularly it is the name
of the first man and father of the human race, created by God himself
out of the dust of the earth. Josephus thinks that he was called Adam by
reason of the reddish colour of the earth out of which he was formed,
for Adam in Hebrew signifies red. God having made man out of the dust of
the earth, breathed into him the breath of life, and gave him dominion
over all the creatures of this world, Gen. i, 26, 27; ii, 7. He created
him after his own image and resemblance; and having blessed him, he
placed him in a delicious garden, in Eden, that he might cultivate it,
and feed upon its fruits, Gen. ii, 8; but under the following
injunction: “Of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat: but of
the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it;
for in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shalt surely die.” The first
thing that Adam did after his introduction into paradise, was to give
names to all the beasts and birds which presented themselves before him,
Gen. ii, 19, 20.

But man was without a fellow creature of his own species; wherefore God
said, “It is not good for man to be alone; I will make him a help meet
for him.” And the Lord caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and while
he slept, he took one of his ribs, “and closed up the flesh instead
thereof;” and of that substance which he took from man made he a woman,
whom he presented to him. Then said Adam, “This is now bone of my bone,
and flesh of my flesh: she shall be called woman, because she was taken
out of man,” Gen. ii, 21, &c.

The woman was seduced by the tempter; and she seduced her husband to eat
of the forbidden fruit. When called to judgment for this transgression
before God, Adam attempted to cast the blame upon his wife, and the
woman upon the serpent tempter. But God declared them all guilty, and
punished the serpent by degradation; the woman by painful childbearing
and subjection; and the man by agricultural labour and toil; of which
punishments every day witnesses the fulfilment. As their natural
passions now became irregular, and their exposure to accidents was
great, God made a covering of skins for Adam and for his wife; and
expelled them from the garden, to the country without; placing at the
east of the garden cherubims and a flaming sword, which turned every
way, to keep the way of the tree of life. It is not known how long Adam
and his wife continued in paradise: some say, many years; others, not
many days; others, not many hours. Adam called his wife’s name _Eve_,
which signifies “the mother of all living.” Shortly after, Eve brought
forth Cain, Gen. iv, 1, 2. It is believed that she had a girl at the
time, and that, generally, she had twins. The Scriptures notice only
three sons of Adam: Cain, Abel, and Seth; and omits daughters; except
that Moses tells us, “Adam begat sons and daughters;” no doubt many. He
died, aged nine hundred and thirty, B. C. 3074.

Upon this history, so interesting to all Adam’s descendants, some
remarks may be offered.

1. It is disputed whether the name _Adam_ is derived from _red earth_.
Sir W. Jones thinks it may be from _Adim_, which in Sanscrit signifies,
_the first_. The Persians, however, denominate him Adamah, which
signifies, according to Sale, _red earth_. The term for woman is
_Aisha_, the feminine of _Aish_, man, and signifies, therefore, maness
or female man.

2. The manner in which the creation of Adam is narrated indicates
something peculiar and eminent in the being to be formed. Among the
heavenly bodies the earth, and above all the various productions of its
surface, vegetable and animal, however perfect in their kinds, and
beautiful and excellent in their respective natures, not one being was
found to whom the rest could minister instruction; inspire with moral
delight; or lead up to the Creator himself. There was, properly
speaking, no intellectual being; none to whom the whole frame and
furniture of material nature could minister knowledge; no one who could
employ upon them the generalizing faculty, and make them the basis of
inductive knowledge. If, then, it was not wholly for himself that the
world was created by God; and if angels were not so immediately
connected with this system, as to lead us to suppose that it was made
for them; a rational inhabitant was obviously still wanting to complete
the work, and to constitute a perfect whole. The formation of such a
being was marked, therefore, by a manner of proceeding which serves to
impress us with a sense of the greatness of the work. Not that it could
be a matter of more difficulty to Omnipotence to create man than any
thing beside; but principally, it is probable, because he was to be the
lord of the whole and therefore himself accountable to the original
proprietor; and was to be the subject of another species of government,
a moral administration; and to be constituted an image of the
intellectual and moral perfections, and of the immortality, of the
common Maker. Every thing therefore, as to man’s creation, is given in a
solemn and deliberative form, and contains also an intimation of a
Trinity of Persons in the Godhead, all equally possessed of _creative_
power, and therefore _Divine_, to each of whom man was to stand in
relations the most sacred and intimate:--“And God said, Let US make man
in our image, after our likeness; and let them have dominion,” &c.

3. It may be next inquired in what that image of God in which man was
made consists.

It is manifest from the history of Moses, that human nature has two
essential constituent parts, the BODY formed out of preëxisting matter,
the earth; and a LIVING SOUL, breathed into the body by an _inspiration_
from God. “And the Lord God formed man out of the dust of the ground,
and breathed into his nostrils (or _face_) the breath of life,
(_lives_,) and man became a living soul.” Whatever was thus imparted to
the body of man, already “_formed_,” and perfectly finished in all its
parts, was the only cause of life; and the whole tenor of Scripture
shows that this was the rational spirit itself, which, by a law of its
Creator, was incapable of death, even after the body had fallen under
that penalty.

The “image” or likeness of God in which man was made has, by some, been
assigned to the body; by others, to the soul. It has, also, been placed
in the circumstance of his having “_dominion_” over the other creatures.
As to the body, it is not necessary to prove that in no sense can it
bear the image of God; that is, be “_like_” God. An upright form has no
more likeness to God than a prone or reptile one; God is incorporeal,
and cannot be the antitype of any thing material.

Equally unfounded is the notion that the image of God in man consisted
in the “dominion” which was granted to him over this lower world.
Limited dominion may, it is true, be an image of large and absolute
dominion; but man is not said to have been made in the image of God’s
dominion, which is an accident merely, for, before creatures existed,
God himself could have no dominion:--he was made in the image and
likeness of God himself. Still farther, it is evident that man,
according to the history, was made in the image of God _in order_ to his
having dominion, as the Hebrew particle imports; and, therefore, his
dominion was consequent upon his formation in the “image” and “likeness”
of God, and could not be that image itself.

The notion that the original resemblance of man to God must be placed in
some one essential quality, is not consistent with holy writ, from which
alone we can derive our information on this subject. We shall, it is
true, find that the Bible partly places it in what is essential to human
nature; but that it should comprehend nothing else, or consist in one
quality only, has no proof or reason; and we are, in fact, taught that
it comprises also what is so far from being essential that it may be
both lost and regained. When God is called “the Father of spirits,” a
likeness is suggested between man and God in the _spirituality_ of their
nature. This is also implied in the striking argument of St. Paul with
the Athenians: “Forasmuch, then, as we are the OFFSPRING of God, we
ought not to think that the Godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or
stone, graven by art and man’s device;”--plainly referring to the
idolatrous statues by which God was represented among Heathens. If
likeness to God in man consisted in bodily shape, this would not have
been an argument against human representations of the Deity; but it
imports, as Howe well expresses it, that “we are to understand that our
resemblance to him, as we are his offspring, lies in some higher, more
noble, and more excellent thing, of which there can be no figure; as who
can tell how to give the figure or image of a thought, or of the mind or
thinking power?” In _spirituality_, and, consequently, immateriality,
this image of God in man, then, in the first instance, consists. Nor is
it any valid objection to say, that “immateriality is not peculiar to
the soul of man; for we have reason to believe that the inferior animals
are actuated by an immaterial principle.” This is as certain as analogy
can make it: but though we allow a spiritual principle to animals, its
_kind_ is obviously inferior; for that spirit which is incapable of
induction and moral knowledge, must be of an inferior order to the
spirit which possesses these capabilities; and this is the kind of
spirit which is peculiar to man.

The sentiment expressed in Wisdom ii, 23, is an evidence that, in the
opinion of the ancient Jews, the image of God in man comprised
_immortality_ also. “For God created man to be immortal, and made him to
be an image of his own eternity:” and though other creatures were made
capable of immortality, and at least the material human frame, whatever
we may think of the case of animals, would have escaped death, had not
sin entered the world; yet, without admitting the absurdity of the
“natural immortality” of the human soul, that essence must have been
constituted immortal in a high and peculiar sense which has ever
retained its prerogative of continued duration amidst the universal
death not only of animals, but of the bodies of all human beings. There
appears also a manifest allusion to man’s immortality, as being included
in _the image of God_, in the reason which is given in Genesis for the
law which inflicts death on murderers: “Whoso sheddeth man’s blood, by
man shall his blood be shed: for in _the image of God_ made he man.” The
essence of the crime of homicide is not confined here to the putting to
death the mere animal part of man; and it must, therefore, lie in the
peculiar value of life to an immortal being, accountable in another
state for the actions done in this, and whose life ought to be specially
guarded for this very reason, that death introduces him into changeless
and eternal relations, which were not to be left to the mercy of human
passions.

To these we are to add the _intellectual powers_, and we have what
divines, in perfect accordance with the Scriptures, have called, “the
NATURAL image of God in his creatures,” which is essential and
ineffaceable. Man was made capable of _knowledge_, and he was endowed
with liberty of _will_.

This natural image of God was the foundation of that MORAL image by
which also man was distinguished. Unless he had been a spiritual,
knowing, and willing being, he would have been wholly incapable of
_moral_ qualities. That he had such qualities eminently, and that in
them consisted the image of God, as well as in the natural attributes
just stated, we have also the express testimony of Scripture: “Lo this
only have I found, that God made man UPRIGHT; but they have sought out
many inventions.” There is also an express allusion to the moral image
of God, in which man was at first created, in Colossians iii, 10: “And
have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge, after the image
of Him that created him;” and in Ephesians iv, 24: “Put on the new man,
which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness.” In these
passages the Apostle represents the change produced in true Christians
by the Gospel, as a “renewal of the image of God in man; as a new or
second creation in that image;” and he explicitly declares, that that
image consists in “knowledge,” in “righteousness,” and in “true
holiness.”

This also may be finally argued from the satisfaction with which the
historian of the creation represents the Creator as viewing the works of
his hands as “_very good_,” which was pronounced with reference to each
of them individually, as well as to the whole: “And God saw _every
thing_ that he had made, and behold it was very good.” But, as to man,
this goodness must necessarily imply moral as well as physical
qualities. Without them he would have been imperfect as _man_; and had
they, in their first exercises, been perverted and sinful, he must have
been an exception, and could not have been pronounced “very good.” The
goodness of man, as a rational being, must lie in devotedness and
consecration to God; consequently, man was at first holy. A rational
creature, as such, is capable of knowing, loving, serving, and living in
communion with the Most Holy One. Adam, at first, did or did not exert
this capacity; if he did not, he was not _very good_,--not good at all.

4. On the intellectual and moral endowments of the progenitor of the
human race, erring views appear to have been taken on both sides.

In knowledge, some have thought him little inferior to the angels;
others, as furnished with but the simple elements of science and of
language. The truth seems to be that, as to _capacity_, his intellect
must have been vigorous beyond that of any of his fallen descendants;
which itself gives us very high views of the strength of his
understanding, although we should allow him to have been created “lower
than the angels.” As to his _actual knowledge_, that would depend upon
the time and opportunity he had for observing the nature and laws of the
objects around him; and the degree in which he was favoured with
revelations from God on moral and religious subjects.

On the degree of moral excellence also in the first man, much license
has been given to a warm imagination, and to rhetorical embellishment;
and Adam’s perfection has sometimes been fixed at an elevation which
renders it exceedingly difficult to conceive how he could fall into sin
at all. On the other hand, those who either deny or hold very slightly
the doctrine of our hereditary depravity, delight to represent Adam as
little superior in moral perfection and capability to his descendants.
But, if we attend to the passages of holy writ above quoted, we shall be
able, on this subject, to ascertain, if not the exact degree of his
moral endowments, yet that there is a certain standard below which they
cannot be placed.--Generally, he was made in the _image_ of God, which,
we have already proved, is to be understood _morally_ as well as
_naturally_. Now, however the image of any thing may be limited in
extent, it must still be an accurate representation as far as it goes.
Every thing good in the creation must always be a miniature
representation of the excellence of the Creator; but, in this case, the
“goodness,” that is, the perfection, of every creature, according to the
part it was designed to act in the general assemblage of beings
collected into our system, wholly forbids us to suppose that the image
of God’s moral perfections in man was a blurred and dim representation.
To whatever _extent_ it went, it necessarily excluded all that from man
which did not resemble God; it was a likeness to God in “righteousness
and true holiness,” whatever the degree of each might be, and excluded
all admixture of unrighteousness and unholiness. Man, therefore, in his
original state, was _sinless_, both in act and in principle. Hence it is
said that “God made man UPRIGHT.” That this signifies moral rectitude
cannot be doubted; but the import of the word is very extensive. It
expresses, by an easy figure, the _exactness_ of truth, justice, and
obedience; and it comprehends the state and habit both of the heart and
the life. Such, then, was the condition of primitive man; there was no
obliquity in his moral principles, his mind, or affections; none in his
conduct. He was perfectly sincere and exactly just, rendering from the
heart all that was due to God and to the creature. Tried by the exactest
_plummet_, he was _upright_; by the most perfect rule, he was
_straight_.

The “_knowledge_” in which the Apostle Paul, in the passage quoted above
from Colossians iii, 10, places “the image of God” after which man was
created, does not merely imply the faculty of understanding, which is a
part of the _natural_ image of God; but that which might be lost,
because it is that in which we may be “_renewed_.” It is, therefore, to
be understood of the faculty of knowledge in right exercise; and of that
willing reception, and firm retaining, and hearty approval, of religious
truth, in which knowledge, when spoken of morally, is always understood
in the Scriptures. We may not be disposed to allow, with some, that Adam
understood the deep philosophy of nature, and could comprehend and
explain the sublime mysteries of religion. The circumstance of his
giving names to the animals, is certainly no sufficient proof of his
having attained to a philosophical acquaintance with their qualities and
distinguishing habits, although we should allow their names to be still
retained in the Hebrew, and to be as expressive of their peculiarities
as some expositors have stated. Sufficient time appears not to have been
afforded him for the study of the properties of animals, as this event
took place previous to the formation of Eve; and as for the notion of
his acquiring knowledge by intuition, this is contradicted by the
_revealed_ fact, that angels themselves acquire their knowledge by
observation and study, though no doubt, with great rapidity and
certainty. The whole of this transaction was supernatural; the beasts
were “brought” to Adam, and it is probable that he named them under a
Divine suggestion. He has been also supposed to be the inventor of
language, but his history shows that he was never without speech. From
the first he was able to converse with God; and we may, therefore, infer
that language was in him a supernatural and miraculous endowment. That
his understanding was, as to its capacity, deep and large beyond any of
his posterity, must follow from the perfection in which he was created;
and his acquisitions of knowledge would, therefore, be rapid and easy.
It was, however, in moral and religious truth, as being of the first
concern to him, that we are to suppose the excellency of his knowledge
to have consisted. “His reason would be clear, his judgment uncorrupted,
and his conscience upright and sensible.” The best knowledge would, in
him, be placed first, and that of every other kind be made subservient
to it, according to its relation to that. The Apostle adds to knowledge,
“righteousness and true holiness;” terms which express, not merely
freedom from sin, but positive and active virtue.

Sober as these views of man’s primitive state are, it is not, perhaps,
possible for us fully to conceive of so exalted a condition as even
this. Below this standard it could not fall; and that it implied a
glory, and dignity, and moral greatness of a very exalted kind, is made
sufficiently apparent from the degree of guilt charged upon Adam when he
fell: for the aggravating circumstances of his offence may well be
deduced from the tremendous consequences which followed.

5. The salvation of Adam has been disputed; for what reason does not
appear, except that the silence of Scripture, as to his after life, has
given bold men occasion to obtrude their speculations upon a subject
which called for no such expression of opinion. As nothing to the
contrary appears, the charitable inference is, that as he was the first
to receive the promise of redemption, so he was the first to prove its
virtue. It is another presumption, that as Adam and Eve were clothed
with skins of beasts, which could not have been slain for food, these
were the skins of their sacrifices; and as the offering of animal
sacrifice was an expression of faith in the appointed propitiation, to
that refuge we may conclude they resorted, and through its merits were
accepted.

6. The Rabbinical and Mohammedan traditions and fables respecting the
first man are as absurd as they are numerous. Some of them indeed are
monstrous, unless we suppose them to be allegories in the exaggerated
style of the orientals. Some say that he was nine hundred cubits high;
whilst others, not satisfied with this, affirm that his head touched the
heavens. The Jews think that he wrote the ninety-first Psalm, invented
the Hebrew letters, and composed several treatises; the Arabians, that
he preserved twenty books which fell from heaven; and the Musselmen,
that he himself wrote ten volumes.

7. That Adam was a type of Christ, is plainly affirmed by St. Paul, who
calls him “the figure of him who was to come.” Hence our Lord is
sometimes called, not inaptly, the Second Adam. This typical relation
stands sometimes in SIMILITUDE, sometimes in CONTRAST. Adam was formed
immediately by God, as was the humanity of Christ. In each the nature
was spotless, and richly endowed with knowledge and true holiness. Both
are seen invested with dominion over the earth and all its creatures;
and this may explain the eighth Psalm, where David seems to make the
sovereignty of the first man over the whole earth in its pristine glory,
the prophetic symbol of the dominion of Christ over the world restored.
Beyond these particulars fancy must not carry us; and the typical
CONTRAST must also be limited to that which is stated in Scripture, or
supported by its allusions. Adam and Christ were each a public person, a
_federal head_ to the whole race of mankind; but the one was the
fountain of sin and death, the other of righteousness and life. By
Adam’s transgression “many were made sinners,” Rom. v, 14–19. Through
him, “death passed upon all men, because all have sinned” in him. But he
thus prefigured that one man, by whose righteousness the “free gift
comes upon all men to justification of life.” The first man communicated
a living soul to all his posterity; the other is a quickening Spirit, to
restore them to newness of life now, and to raise them up at the last
day. By the imputation of the first Adam’s sin, and the communication of
his fallen, depraved nature, death reigned over those who had not sinned
after the similitude of Adam’s transgression; and through the
righteousness of the Second Adam, and the communication of a divine
nature by the Holy Spirit, favour and grace shall much more abound in
Christ’s true followers unto eternal life. See REDEMPTION.

ADAMA, one of the five cities which were destroyed by fire from heaven,
and buried under the waters of the Dead Sea, Gen. xiv, 2; Deut. xxix,
23. It was the most easterly of all those which were swallowed up; and
there is some probability that it was not entirely sunk under the
waters; or that the inhabitants of the country built a new city of the
same name upon the eastern shore of the Dead Sea: for Isaiah, according
to the Septuagint, says, “God will destroy the Moabites, the city of Ar,
and the remnant of Adama.”

ADAMANT, שמיר, Ἀδάμας, Ecclus. xvi, 16. A stone of impenetrable
hardness. Sometimes this name is given to the diamond; and so it is
rendered, Jer. xvii, 1. But the Hebrew word rather means a very hard
kind of stone, probably the _smiris_, which was also used for cutting,
engraving, and polishing other hard stones and crystals. The word occurs
also in Ezek. iii, 9, and Zech. vii, 12. In the former place the Lord
says to the Prophet, “I have made thy forehead as an adamant, firmer
than a rock;” that is, endued thee with undaunted courage. In the
latter, the hearts of wicked men are declared to be as adamant; neither
broken by the threatenings and judgments of God, nor penetrated by his
promises, invitations, and mercies. See DIAMOND.

ADAMITES, sects reputed to have professed the attainment of a perfect
innocence, so that they wore no clothes in their assemblies. But Lardner
doubts their existence in ancient, and Beausobre in modern, times.

ADAR, the twelfth month of the ecclesiastical, and the sixth of the
civil, year among the Hebrews. It contains but twenty-nine days, and
answers to our February, and sometimes enters into March, according to
the course of the moon, by which they regulated their seasons.

ADARCONIM, אדרכונים, a sort of money, mentioned 1 Chron. xxix, 7, and
Ezra viii, 27. The Vulgate translates it, _golden pence_, the LXX,
_pieces of gold_. They were darics, a gold coin, which some value at
twenty drachms of silver.

ADER. Jerom observes, that the place where the angels declared the birth
of Jesus Christ to the shepherds, was called by this name, Luke ii, 8,
9. The empress Helena built a church on this spot, the remains of which
are still visible.

ADDER, a venomous serpent, more usually called the viper. In our
translation of the Bible we find the word adder five times; but without
sufficient authority from the original.

שפיפון, in Gen. xlix, 17, is probably the cerastes; a serpent of the
viper kind, of a light brown colour, which lurks in the sand and the
tracks of wheels in the road, and unexpectedly bites not only the unwary
traveller, but the legs of horses and other beasts. By comparing the
Danites to this artful reptile, the patriarch intimated that by
stratagem, more than by open bravery, they should avenge themselves of
their enemies and extend their conquests.--פתן, in Psalm lviii, 4; xci,
13, signifies an asp. We may perhaps trace to this the Python of the
Greeks, and its derivatives. (See _Asp_.)--עכשוב, עכשוב found only in
Psalm cxl, 3, is derived from a verb which signifies _to bend back on
itself_. The Chaldee Paraphrasts render it עכביש, which we translate
elsewhere, _spider_: they may therefore have understood it to have been
the tarantula. It is rendered _asp_ by the Septuagint and Vulgate, and
is so taken, Rom. iii, 13. The name is from the Arabic _achasa_. But
there are several serpents which coil themselves previously to darting
on their enemy; if this be a character of the asp, it is not peculiar to
that reptile.--צפע, or צפעני, Prov. xxiii, 32; Isaiah xi, 8; xiv, 29;
lix, 5; and Jer. viii, 17, is that deadly serpent called the basilisk,
said to kill with its very breath. See COCKATRICE.

In Psalm lviii, 5, reference is made to the effect of musical sounds
upon serpents. That they might be rendered tame and harmless by certain
charms, or soft and sweet sounds, and trained to delight in music, was
an opinion which prevailed very early and universally.

Many ancient authors mention this effect; Virgil speaks of it
particularly, _Æn._ vii, v, 750.

            _Quin et Marrubia venit de gente sacerdos,
            Fronde super galeam et felici comptus oliva,
            Archippi regis missu fortissimus Umbro;
            Vipereo generi, et graviter spirantibus hydris
            Spargere qui somnos cantuque manuque solebat,
            Mulcebatque iras, et morsus arte levabat._

             “Umbro, the brave Marrubian priest, was there,
              Sent by the Marsian monarch to the war.
             The smiling olive with her verdant boughs
             Shades his bright helmet and adorns his brows;
             His charms in peace the furious serpent keep;
             And lull the envenom’d viper’s race to sleep:
             His healing hand allay’d the raging pain,
             And at his touch the poisons fled again.”
                                                  _Pitt._

Mr. Boyle quotes the following passage from Sir H. Blunt’s Voyage into
the Levant:--

“Many rarities of living creatures I saw in Grand Cairo; but the most
ingenious was a nest of serpents, of two feet long, black and ugly, kept
by a Frenchman, who, when he came to handle them, would not endure him,
but ran and hid in their hole. Then he would take his cittern and play
upon it. They, hearing his music, came all crawling to his feet, and
began to climb up him, till he gave over playing, then away they ran.”

The wonderful effect which music produces on the serpent tribes, is
confirmed by the testimony of several respectable moderns. Adders swell
at the sound of a flute, raising themselves up on the one half of their
body, turning themselves round, beating proper time, and following the
instrument. Their head, naturally round and long like an eel, becomes
broad and flat like a fan. The tame serpents, many of which the
orientals keep in their houses, are known to leave their holes in hot
weather, at the sound of a musical instrument, and run upon the
performer. Dr. Shaw had an opportunity of seeing a number of serpents
keep exact time with the Dervishes in their circulatory dances, running
over their heads and arms, turning when they turned, and stopping when
they stopped. The rattlesnake acknowledges the power of music as much as
any of his family; of which the following instance is a decisive proof:
When Chateaubriand was in Canada, a snake of that species entered their
encampment; a young Canadian, one of the party, who could play on the
flute, to divert his associates, advanced against the serpent with his
new species of weapon: on the approach of his enemy, the haughty reptile
curled himself into a spiral line, flattened his head, inflated his
cheeks, contracted his lips, displayed his envenomed fangs, and his
bloody throat, his double tongue glowed like two flames of fire; his
eyes were burning coals; his body, swollen with rage, rose and fell like
the bellows of a forge; his dilated skin assumed a dull and scaly
appearance; and his tail, which sounded the denunciation of death,
vibrated with so great rapidity as to resemble a light vapour. The
Canadian now began to play upon his flute, the serpent started with
surprise, and drew back his head. In proportion as he was struck with
the magic effect, his eyes lost their fierceness, the oscillations of
his tail became slower, and the sound which it emitted became weaker,
and gradually died away. Less perpendicular upon their spiral line, the
rings of the fascinated serpent were by degrees expanded, and sunk one
after another upon the ground, in concentric circles. The shades of
azure, green, white, and gold, recovered their brilliancy on his
quivering skin, and slightly turning his head, he remained motionless,
in the attitude of attention and pleasure. At this moment, the Canadian
advanced a few steps, producing with his flute sweet and simple notes.
The reptile, inclining his variegated neck, opened a passage with his
head through the high grass, and began to creep after the musician,
stopping when he stopped, and beginning to follow him again, as soon as
he moved forward. In this manner he was led out of their camp, attended
by a great number of spectators, both savages and Europeans, who could
scarcely believe their eyes, when they beheld this wonderful effect of
harmony. The assembly unanimously decreed, that the serpent which had so
highly entertained them, should be permitted to escape. Many of them are
carried in baskets through Hindostan, and procure a maintenance for a
set of people who play a few simple notes on the flute, with which the
snakes seem much delighted, and keep time by a graceful motion of the
head, erecting about half their length from the ground, and following
the music with gentle curves, like the undulating lines of a swan’s
neck.

But on some serpents, these charms seem to have no power; and it appears
from Scripture, that the adder sometimes takes precautions to prevent
the fascination which he sees preparing for him: “for the deaf adder
shutteth her ear, and will not hear the voice of the most skilful
charmer.” The threatening of the Prophet Jeremiah proceeds upon the same
fact: “I will send serpents” (cockatrices) “among you, which will not be
charmed, and they shall bite you.” In all these quotations, the sacred
writers, while they take it for granted that many serpents are disarmed
by charming, plainly admit that the powers of the charmer are in vain
exerted upon others.

It is the opinion of some interpreters, that the word שחל, which in some
parts of Scripture denotes a lion, in others means an adder, or some
other kind of serpent. Thus, in the ninety-first Psalm, they render it
the basilisk: “Thou shalt tread upon the adder and the basilisk, the
young lion and the dragon thou shalt trample under foot.” Indeed, all
the ancient expositors agree, that some species of serpent is meant,
although they cannot determine what particular serpent the sacred writer
had in view. The learned Bochart thinks it extremely probable that the
holy Psalmist in this verse treats of serpents only; and, by
consequence, that both the terms שחל and כפיר mean some kind of snakes,
as well as פתן and תנין; because the coherence of the verse is by this
view better preserved, than by mingling lions and serpents together, as
our translators and other interpreters have commonly done; nor is it
easy to imagine what can be meant by treading upon the lion, and
trampling the young lion under foot; for it is not possible in walking
to tread upon the lion, as upon the adder, the basilisk, and other
serpents.

To ADJURE, to bind by oath, as under the penalty of a fearful curse,
Joshua vi, 26; Mark v, 7. 2. To charge solemnly, as by the authority,
and under pain, of the displeasure of God, Matt. xxvi, 63; Acts xix, 13.

ADONAI, one of the names of God. This word in the plural number
signifies _my Lords_. The Jews, who either out of respect or
superstition, do not pronounce the name of Jehovah, read Adonai in the
room of it, as often as they meet with Jehovah in the Hebrew text. But
the ancient Jews were not so scrupulous. Neither is there any law which
forbids them to pronounce any name of God.

ADONIS. The text of the Vulgate in Ezek. viii, 14, says, that the
Prophet saw women sitting in the temple, and weeping for Adonis; but
according to the reading of the Hebrew text, they are said to weep for
Thamuz, or Tammuz, the _hidden one_. Among the Egyptians Adonis was
adored under the name of Osiris, the husband of Isis. But he was
sometimes called by the name of Ammuz, or Tammuz, _the concealed_,
probably to denote his death or burial. The Hebrews, in derision,
sometimes call him the _dead_, Psalm cvi, 28; Lev. xix, 28; because they
wept for him, and represented him as dead in his coffin; and at other
times they denominate him the image of jealousy, Ezek. viii, 3, 5,
because he was the object of the jealousy of Mars. The Syrians,
Phœnicians, and Cyprians, called him Adonis; and Calmet is of opinion
that the Ammonites and Moabites designated him by the name of Baal-peor.

The manner in which they celebrated the festival of this false deity was
as follows: They represented him as lying dead in his coffin, wept for
him, bemoaned themselves, and sought for him with great eagerness and
inquietude. After this, they pretended that they had found him again,
and that he was still living. At this good news they exhibited marks of
the most extravagant joy, and were guilty of a thousand lewd practices,
to convince Venus how much they congratulated her on the return and
revival of her favourite, as they had before condoled with her on his
death. The Hebrew women, of whom the Prophet Ezekiel speaks, celebrated
the feasts of Tammuz, or Adonis, in Jerusalem; and God showed the
Prophet these women weeping for this infamous god, even in his temple.

Fabulous history gives the following account of Adonis: He was a
beautiful young shepherd, the son of Cyniras, king of Cyprus, by his own
daughter Myrrha. The goddess Venus fell in love with this youth, and
frequently met him on mount Libanus. Mars, who envied this rival,
transformed himself into a wild boar, and, as Adonis was hunting, struck
him in the groin and killed him. Venus lamented the death of Adonis in
an inconsolable manner. The eastern people, in imitation of her
mourning, generally established some solemn days for the bewailing of
Adonis. After his death, Venus went to the shades, and obtained from
Proserpine, that Adonis might be with her six months in the year, and
continue the other six in the infernal regions. Upon this were founded
those public rejoicings, which succeeded the lamentations of his death.
Some say that Adonis was a native of Syria; some, of Cyprus; and others,
of Egypt.

ADOPTION. An act by which one takes another into his family, owns him
for his son, and appoints him his heir. The Greeks and Romans had many
regulations concerning adoption. It does not appear that adoption,
properly so called, was formerly in use among the Jews. Moses makes no
mention of it in his laws; and the case of Jacob’s two grandsons, Gen.
xlviii, 14, seems rather a substitution.

2. Adoption in a theological sense is that act of God’s free grace by
which, upon our being justified by faith in Christ, we are received into
the family of God, and entitled to the inheritance of heaven. This
appears not so much a distinct act of God, as involved in, and
necessarily flowing from, our justification; so that, at least the one
always implies the other. Nor is there any good ground to suppose that
in the New Testament the term adoption is used with any reference to the
civil practice of adoption by the Greeks, Romans, or other Heathens, and
therefore it is not judicious to illustrate the texts in which the word
occurs by their formalities. The Apostles in using the term appear to
have had before them the simple view, that our sins had deprived us of
our sonship, the favour of God, and the right to the inheritance of
eternal life; but that, upon our return to God, and reconciliation with
him, our forfeited privileges were not only restored, but greatly
heightened through the paternal kindness of God. They could scarcely be
forgetful of the affecting parable of the prodigal son; and it is under
the same view that St. Paul quotes from the Old Testament, “Wherefore
come out from among them, and be ye separate, saith the Lord, and touch
not the unclean thing, and I will receive you, and I will be a Father
unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord
Almighty.”

Adoption, then, is that act by which we who were alienated, and enemies,
and disinherited, are made the sons of God, and heirs of his eternal
glory. “If children, then heirs, heirs of God and joint heirs with
Christ;” where it is to be remarked, that it is not in our own right,
nor in the right of any work done in us, or which we ourselves do,
though it should be an evangelical work, that we become heirs; but
jointly with Christ, and in his right.

3. To this state belong, freedom from a servile spirit, for we are not
servants but sons; the special love and care of God our heavenly Father;
a filial confidence in him; free access to him at all times and in all
circumstances; a title to the heavenly inheritance; and the Spirit of
adoption, or the witness of the Holy Spirit to our adoption, which is
the foundation of all the comfort we can derive from those privileges,
as it is the only means by which we can know that they are ours.

4. The last mentioned great privilege of adoption merits special
attention. It consists in the inward witness or testimony of the Holy
Spirit to the sonship of believers, from which flows a comfortable
persuasion or conviction of our present acceptance with God, and the
hope of our future and eternal glory. This is taught in several passages
of Scripture:--

Rom. viii, 15, 16, “For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again
to fear, but the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. The
Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit that we are the children
of God.” In this passage it is to be remarked, 1. That the Holy Spirit
takes away “fear,” a servile dread of God as offended. 2. That the
“Spirit of God” here mentioned, is not the personified spirit or genius
of the Gospel, as some would have it, but “the Spirit itself,” or
himself, and hence he is called in the Galatians, “the Spirit of his
Son,” which cannot mean the genius of the Gospel. 3. That he inspires a
filial confidence in God, as our Father, which is opposed to “the fear”
produced by the “spirit of bondage.” 4. That he excites this filial
confidence, and enables us to call God our Father, by witnessing,
bearing testimony with our spirit, “that we are the children of God.”

Gal. iv, 4–6, “But when the fulness of the time was come, God sent forth
his Son, made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem them that were
under the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons; and because
ye are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts,
crying, Abba, Father.” Here also are to be noted, 1. The means of our
redemption from under (the curse of) the law,--the incarnation and
sufferings of Christ. 2. That the adoption of sons follows upon our
actual redemption from that curse, or, in other words, upon our pardon.
3. That upon our being pardoned, the “Spirit of the Son” is “sent forth
into our hearts,” producing the same effect as that mentioned in the
Epistle to the Romans, viz. filial confidence in God,--“crying, Abba,
Father.” To these texts are to be added all those passages, so numerous
in the New Testament, which express the confidence and the joy of
Christians; their friendship with God; their confident access to him as
their God; their entire union and delightful intercourse with him in
spirit.

This has been generally termed the doctrine of assurance, and, perhaps,
the expressions of St. Paul, “the full assurance of faith,” and “the
full assurance of hope,” may warrant the use of the word. But as there
is a current and generally understood sense of this term, implying that
the assurance of our present acceptance and sonship implies an assurance
of our final perseverance, and of an indefeasible title to heaven; the
phrase, a comfortable persuasion, or conviction of our justification and
adoption, arising out of the Spirit’s inward and direct testimony, is to
be preferred.

There is, also, another reason for the sparing and cautious use of the
term assurance, which is, that it seems to imply, though not
necessarily, the absence of all doubt, and shuts out all those lower
degrees of persuasion which may exist in the experience of Christians.
For, our faith may not at first, or at all times, be equally strong, and
the testimony of the Spirit may have its degrees of clearness.
Nevertheless, the fulness of this attainment is to be pressed upon every
one: “Let us draw near,” says St. Paul to all Christians, “with full
assurance of faith.”

It may serve, also, to remove an objection sometimes made to the
doctrine, and to correct an error which sometimes pervades the statement
of it, to observe that this assurance, persuasion, or conviction,
whichever term be adopted, is not of the essence of justifying faith;
that is, justifying faith does not consist in the assurance that I am
now forgiven, through Christ. This would be obviously contradictory. For
we must believe before we can be justified; much more before we can be
assured, in any degree, that we are justified:--this persuasion,
therefore, follows justification, and is one of its results. But though
we must not only distinguish, but separate, this persuasion of our
acceptance from the faith which justifies, we must not separate it, but
only distinguish it, from justification itself. With that come in as
concomitants, adoption, the “Spirit of adoption,” and regeneration.

ADORATION, the act of rendering divine honours; or of addressing God or
any other being as supposing it to be God. (See _Worship_.) The word is
compounded of _ad_, “to,” and _os_, “mouth;” and literally signifies to
apply the hand to the mouth; _manum ad os admovere_, “to kiss the hand;”
this being in eastern countries one of the great marks of respect and
submission. To this mode of idolatrous worship Job refers, xxxi, 26, 27.
See also 1 Kings xix, 18.

The Jewish manner of adoration was by prostration, bowing, and kneeling.
The Christians adopted the Grecian, rather than the Roman, method, and
always adored uncovered. The ordinary posture of the ancient Christians
was kneeling; but on Sundays, standing.

ADORATION is also used for certain extraordinary acts of civil honour,
which resemble those paid to the Deity, yet are given to men.

We read of adorations paid to kings, princes, emperors, popes, bishops,
abbots, &c, by kneeling, falling prostrate, kissing the feet, hands,
garments, &c.

The Persian manner of adoration, introduced by Cyrus, was by bending the
knee, and falling on the face at the prince’s feet, striking the earth
with the forehead, and kissing the ground. This was an indispensable
condition on the part of foreign ministers and ambassadors, as well as
the king’s own vassals, of being admitted to audience, and of obtaining
any favour. This token of reverence was ordered to be paid to their
favourites as well as to themselves, as we learn from the history of
Haman and Mordecai, in the book of Esther; and even to their statues and
images; for Philostratus informs us that, in the time of Apollonius, a
golden statue of the king was exposed to all who entered Babylon, and
none but those who adored it were admitted within the gates. The
ceremony, which the Greeks called ϖροσκυνεῖν, Conon refused to perform
to Artaxerxes, and Callisthenes to Alexander the Great, as reputing it
impious and unlawful.

The adoration performed to the Roman and Grecian emperors consisted in
bowing or kneeling at the prince’s feet, laying hold of his purple robe,
and then bringing the hand to the lips. Some attribute the origin of
this practice to Constantius. They were only persons of rank or dignity
that were entitled to the honour. Bare kneeling before the emperor to
deliver a petition, was also called adoration.

It is particularly said of Dioclesian, that he had gems fastened to his
shoes, that divine honours might be more willingly paid him, by kissing
his feet. And this mode of adoration was continued till the last age of
the Greek monarchy. When any one pays his respects to the king of Achen
in Sumatra, he first takes off his shoes and stockings, and leaves them
at the door.

The practice of adoration may be said to be still subsisting in England,
in the custom of kissing the king’s or queen’s hand.

Adoration is also used in the court of Rome, in the ceremony of kissing
the pope’s feet. It is not certain at what period this practice was
introduced into the church: but it was probably borrowed from the
Byzantine court, and accompanied the temporal power. Dr. Maclaine, in
the chronological table which he has subjoined to his translation of
Mosheim’s _Ecclesiastical History_, places its introduction in the
eighth century, immediately after the grant of Pepin and Charlemagne.
Baronius traces it to a much higher antiquity, and pretends that
examples of this homage to the vicars of Christ occur so early as the
year 204. These prelates finding a vehement disposition in the people to
fall down before them, and kiss their feet, procured crucifixes to be
fastened on their slippers; by which stratagem, the adoration intended
for the pope’s person is supposed to be transferred to Christ. Divers
acts of this adoration we find offered even by princes to the pope; and
Gregory XIII, claims this act of homage as a duty.

Adoration properly is paid only to the pope when placed on the altar, in
which posture the cardinals, conclavists, alone are admitted to kiss his
feet. The people are afterward admitted to do the like at St. Peter’s
church; the ceremony is described at large by Guicciardin.

Adoration is more particularly used for kissing one’s hand in presence
of another as a token of reverence. The Jews adored by kissing their
hands, and bowing down their heads; whence in their language kissing is
properly used for adoration. This illustrates a passage in Psalm ii,
“Kiss the Son lest he be angry;”--that is, pay him _homage_ and
_worship_.

It was the practice among the Greek Christians to worship with the head
uncovered, 1 Cor. xi; but in the east the ancient custom of worshipping
with the head covered was retained.

ADRAMMELECH, the son of Sennacherib, king of Assyria. The king returning
to Nineveh, after his unhappy expedition made into Judea against king
Hezekiah, was killed by his two sons, Adrammelech and Sharezer, whilst
at his devotions in the temple of his god Nisroch, Isaiah xxxvii, 38; 2
Kings xix. It is not known what prompted these two princes to commit
this parricide; but after they had committed the murder, they fled for
safety to the mountains of Armenia, and their brother, Esarhaddon,
succeeded to the crown.

ADRAMMELECH was also one of the gods adored by the inhabitants of
Sepharvaim, who were settled in the country of Samaria, in the room of
the Israelites, who were carried beyond the Euphrates. The Sepharvaites
made their children pass through the fire in honour of this idol, and
another, called _Anammelech_, 2 Kings xvii, 31. The Rabbins say, that
Adrammelech was represented under the form of a mule; but there is much
more reason to believe that Adrammelech meant the sun, and Anammelech
the moon; the first signifying _the magnificent king_, the second _the
gentle king_,--many eastern nations adoring the moon as a _god_, not as
a _goddess_.

ADRAMYTTIUM, a city on the west coast of Mysia, in Lesser Asia, over
against the isle of Lesbos. It was in a ship belonging to this place,
that St. Paul sailed from Cesarea to proceed to Rome as a prisoner, Acts
xxvii, 2. It is now called _Edremit_.

ADRIA. This name, which occurs in Acts xxvii, 27, is now confined to the
gulf lying between Italy on the one side, and the coasts of Dalmatia and
Albania on the other. But in St. Paul’s time it was extended to all that
portion of the Mediterranean between Crete and Sicily. Thus Ptolemy says
that Sicily was bounded on the east by the Adriatic, and Crete in a
similar manner on the west; and Strabo says that the Ionian Gulf was a
part of what, in his time, was called the Adriatic Sea.

ADULLAM, a city in the tribe of Judah, to the west of Hebron, whose king
was slain by Joshua, Josh. xii, 15. It is frequently mentioned in the
history of Saul and David; and is chiefly memorable from the cave in its
neighbourhood, where David retired from Achish, king of Gath, when he
was joined by the distressed and discontented, to the number of four
hundred, over whom he became captain, 1 Sam. xxii, 1. Judas Maccabeus
encamped in the plain of Adullam, where he passed the Sabbath day, 2
Mac. xii, 38. Eusebius says that, in his time, Adullam was a very great
town, ten miles to the east of Eleutheropolis.

ADULTERY, the violation of the marriage bed. The law of Moses punished
with death both the man and the woman who were guilty of this crime,
Lev. xx, 10. If a woman was betrothed to a man, and was guilty of this
infamous crime before the marriage was completed, she was, in this case,
along with her paramour, to be stoned, Deut. xxii, 22–24.

When any man among the Jews, prompted by jealousy, suspected his wife of
the crime of adultery, he brought her first before the judges, and
informed them that, in consequence of his suspicions, he had privately
admonished her, but that she was regardless of his admonitions. If
before the judges she asserted her innocency, he required that she
should drink the _waters of jealousy_, that God might by these means
discover what she attempted to conceal, Num. v, 12, &c. The man then
produced his witnesses, and they were heard. After this, both the man
and the woman were conveyed to Jerusalem, and placed before the
sanhedrim; the judges of which, by threats and other means, endeavoured
to confound the woman, and make her confess. If she persisted in denying
the fact, she was led to the eastern gate of the court of Israel,
stripped of her own clothes, and dressed in black, before great numbers
of her own sex. The priest then told her, that if she was really
innocent, she had nothing to fear; but if guilty, she might expect to
suffer all that the law had denounced against her, to which she
answered, “Amen, amen.” The priest then wrote the terms of the law in
this form:--“If a strange man hath not come near you, and you are not
polluted by forsaking the bed of your husband, these bitter waters,
which I have cursed, will not hurt you: but if you have polluted
yourself by coming near to another man, and gone astray from your
husband,--may you be accursed of the Lord, and become an example for all
his people; may your thigh rot, and your belly swell till it burst; may
these cursed waters enter into your belly, and being swelled therewith,
may your thighs putrefy.“

After this, the priest filled a pitcher out of the brazen vessel, near
the altar of burnt offerings, cast some dust of the pavement into it,
mingled something with it as bitter as wormwood, and then read the
curses, and received her answer of Amen. Another priest, in the
meantime, tore off her clothes as low as her bosom--made her head
bare--untied the tresses of her hair--fastened her clothes, which were
thus torn, with a girdle under her breasts, and then presented her with
the tenth part of an ephah, or about three pints, of barley meal. The
other priest then gave her the _waters of jealousy_, or bitterness, to
drink; and as soon as the woman had swallowed them, he gave her the meal
in a vessel like a frying-pan into her hand. This was stirred before the
Lord, and part of it thrown into the fire of the altar. If the wife was
innocent, she returned with her husband, and the waters, so far from
injuring her, increased her health, and made her more fruitful; but if
she was guilty, she grew pale immediately, her eyes swelled; and, lest
she should pollute the temple, she was instantly carried out, with these
symptoms upon her, and died instantly, with all the ignominious
circumstances related in the curses.

On this law of Moses, Michaëlis has the following remarks:--

“This oath was, perhaps, a relic of some more severe and barbarous
consuetudinary laws, whose rigours Moses mitigated; as he did in many
other cases, where an established usage could not be conveniently
abolished altogether. Among ourselves, in barbarous times, the _ordeal_,
or trial by fire, was, notwithstanding the parity of our married people,
in common use; and this, in point of equity, was much the same in
effect, as if the husband had had the right to insist on his wife
submitting to the hazardous trial of her purity, by drinking a poisoned
potion; which, according to an ancient superstition, could never hurt
her if she was innocent. And, in fact, such a right is not altogether
unexampled; for, according to Oldendorp’s _History of the Mission of the
Evangelical Brethren, in the Caribbee Islands_, it is actually in use
among some of the savage nations in the interior parts of Western
Africa.

“Now, when in place of a poisoned potion like this, which very few
husbands can be very willing to have administered to their wives, we
see, as among the Hebrews, an imprecation-drink, whose avenger God
himself promises to become, we cannot but be struck with the contrast of
wisdom and clemency which such a contrivance manifests. In the one case,
(and herein consists their great distinction,) innocence can only be
preserved by a miracle; while, on the other, guilt only is revealed and
punished by the hand of God himself.

“By one of the clauses of the oath of purgation, (and had not the
legislator been perfectly assured of his divine mission, the insertion
of any such clause would have been a very bold step indeed,) a visible
and corporeal punishment was specified, which the person swearing
imprecated on herself, and which God himself was understood as engaging
to execute. To have given so accurate a definition of the punishment
that God meant to inflict, and still more one that consisted of such a
rare disease, would have been a step of incomprehensible boldness in a
legislator who pretended to have a divine mission, if he was not, with
the most assured conviction, conscious of its reality.

“Seldom, however, very seldom, was it likely that Providence would have
an opportunity of inflicting the punishment in question. For the oath
was so regulated, that a woman of the utmost effrontery could scarcely
have taken it without changing colour to such a degree as to betray
herself.

“In the _first_ place, it was not administered to the woman in her own
house, but she was under the necessity of going to that place of the
land where God in a special manner had his abode, and took it there.
Now, the solemnity of the place, unfamiliarized to her by daily business
or resort, would have a great effect upon her mind. In the _next_ place,
there was offered unto God what was termed an _execration offering_, not
in order to propitiate his mercy, but to invoke his vengeance on the
guilty. Here the process was extremely slow, which gave her more time
for reflection than to a guilty person could be acceptable, and that,
too, amidst a multitude of unusual ceremonies. For the priest conducted
her to the front of the sanctuary, and took holy water, that is, water
out of the priests’ laver, which stood before it, together with some
earth off its floor, which was likewise deemed holy; and having put the
earth in the water, he then proceeded to uncover the woman’s head, that
her face might be seen, and every change on her countenance during the
administration of the oath accurately observed: and this was a
circumstance which, in the east, where the women are always veiled, must
have had a great effect; because a woman, accustomed to wear a veil,
could, on so extraordinary an occasion, have had far less command of her
eyes and her countenance than a European adulteress, who is generally a
perfect mistress in all the arts of dissimulation, would display. To
render the scene still more awful, the tresses of her hair were
loosened, and then the execration offering was put into _her_ hand,
while the priest held in _his_ the imprecation water. This is commonly
termed the _bitter water_; but we must not understand this as if the
water had really been bitter; for how could it have been so? The earth
of the floor of the tabernacle could not make it bitter. Among the
Hebrews, and other oriental nations, the word _bitter_ was rather used
for _curse_: and, strictly speaking, the phrase does not mean _bitter
water_, but the _water of bitternesses_, that is, of curses. The priest
now pronounced the oath, which was in all points so framed that it could
excite no terrors in the breast of an innocent woman; for it expressly
consisted in this, that the imprecation water should not harm her if she
was innocent. It would seem as if the priest here made a stop, and again
left the woman some time to consider whether she would proceed with the
oath. This I infer from the circumstance of his speech not being
directly continued in verse 21st, which is rather the _apodosis_ of what
goes before; and from the detail proceeding anew in the words of the
historian, _Then shall the priest pronounce the rest of the oath and the
curses to the woman; and proceed thus_.--After this stop he pronounced
the curses, and the woman was obliged to declare her acquiescence in
them by a repeated _Amen_. Nor was the solemn scene yet altogether at an
end; but rather, as it were commenced anew. For the priest had yet to
write the curses in a book, which I suppose he did at great
deliberation; having done so, he washed them out again in the very
imprecation water, which the woman had now to drink; and this water
being now presented to her, she was obliged to drink it, with this
warning and assurance, in the name of God, that if she was guilty, it
would prove within her an absolute curse. Now, what must have been her
feelings, while drinking, if not conscious of purity? In my opinion she
must have conceived that she already felt an alteration in the state of
her body, and the germ, as it were, of the disease springing within her.
Conscience and imagination would conspire together, and render it almost
impossible for her to drink it out. Finally, the execration offering was
taken out of her hand, and burnt upon the altar. I cannot but think
that, under the sanction of such a _purgatorium_, perjury must have been
a very rare occurrence indeed. If it happened but once in an age, God
had bound himself to punish it; and if this took place but once, (if but
one woman who had taken the oath was attacked with that rare disease
which it threatened,) it was quite enough to serve as a determent to all
others for at least one generation.”

This procedure had also the effect of keeping in mind, among the Jews,
God’s high displeasure against this violation of his law; and though
some lax moralists have been found, in modern times, to palliate it, yet
the Christian will always remember the solemn denunciations of the New
Testament against a crime so aggravated, whether considered in its
effects upon the domestic relations, upon the moral character of the
guilty parties, or upon society at large,--“Whoremongers and adulterers
God will judge.”

ADULTERY, in the prophetic scriptures, is often metaphorically taken,
and signifies idolatry, and apostasy from God, by which men basely
defile themselves, and wickedly violate their ecclesiastical and
covenant relation to God, Hos. ii, 2; Ezek. xvi.

ADVOCATE, Παράκλητος, _a patron_, one who pleads the cause of any one
before another. In this sense the term is applied to Christ our
intercessor, 1 John ii, 1. It signifies also a _comforter_, and _an
instructer_; and is used of the Holy Spirit, John xiv, 16, and xv, 26.

ADYTUM is a Greek word, signifying _inaccessible_, by which is
understood the most retired and secret place of the Heathen temples,
into which none but the priests were allowed to enter. The _adytum_ of
the Greeks and Romans answered to the _sanctum sanctorum_ of the Jews,
and was the place from whence oracles were delivered.

ÆRA, a series of years, commencing from a certain point of time called
an _epocha_: thus we say, the Christian æra; that is, the number of
years elapsed since the birth of Christ. The generality of authors use
the terms æra and epocha in a synonymous sense; that is, for the point
of time from which any computation begins.

The ancient Jews made use of several æras in their computation;
sometimes they reckoned from the deluge, sometimes from the division of
tongues; sometimes from their departure out of Egypt; and at other times
from the building of the temple; and sometimes from the restoration
after the Babylonish captivity: but their vulgar æra was from the
creation of the world, which falls in with the year of the Julian period
953; and consequently they supposed the world created 294 years sooner
than according to our computation. But when the Jews became subject to
the Syro-Macedonian kings, they were obliged to make use of the æra of
the Seleucidæ in all their contracts, which from thence was called the
æra of contracts. This æra begins with the year of the world 3692, of
the Julian period 4402, and before Christ 312. The æra in general use
among the Christians is that from the birth of Jesus Christ, concerning
the true time of which chronologers differ; some place it two years,
others four, and again others five, before the vulgar æra, which is
fixed for the year of the world 4004: but Archbishop Usher, and after
him the generality of modern chronologers, place it in the year of the
world 4000.

The ancient Heathens used several æras:

1. The æra of the first olympiad is placed in the year of the world
3228, and before the vulgar æra of Jesus Christ 776. 2. The taking of
Troy by the Greeks, in the year of the world 2820, and before Jesus
Christ 1884. 3. The voyage undertaken for the purpose of bringing away
the golden fleece, in the year of the world 2760. 4. The foundation of
Rome, in 2856. 5. The æra of Nabonassar, in 3257. 6. The æra of
Alexander the Great, or his last victory over Darius, in 3674, and
before Jesus Christ 330.

AERIANS, a sect which arose about the middle of the fourth century,
being the followers of Aërius, (who must be distinguished from Arius and
Aëtius,) a monk and a presbyter of Sebastia, in Pontus. He is charged
with being an Arian, or Semi-Arian; but the heaviest accusation against
him is an attempt to reform the church; and, by rejecting prayers for
the dead, with certain fasts and festivals then superstitiously
observed, to reduce Christianity as nearly as possible “to its primitive
simplicity; a purpose, indeed, laudable and noble,” says Dr. Mosheim,
“when considered in itself: though the principles from _whence_ it
springs, and the means _by_ which it is executed, are sometimes, in many
respects, worthy of censure, and _may_ have been so in the case of this
reformer.” This gentle rebuke probably refers to a report that the zeal
of Aërius originated in his being disappointed of the bishopric of
Sebastia, (conferred on Eustathius,) which led him to affirm that the
Scriptures make no distinction between a presbyter and a bishop, which
he founded chiefly on 1 Tim. iv, 14. Hence he is considered by many, as
the father of the modern Presbyterians.--“For this opinion, _chiefly_,”
says Dr. Turner, “he is ranked among the heretics, by Epiphanius, his
contemporary, who calls it a notion _full of folly and madness_. His
followers were driven from the churches, and out of all the towns and
villages, and were obliged to assemble in the woods, caverns, and open
defiles.”

AETIANS, another branch (as it is said) of Arians, so called from
Aëtius, bishop of Antioch, who is also charged with maintaining “faith
without works,” as “sufficient to salvation,” or rather justification;
and with maintaining “that sin is not imputed to believers.” It is
added, that he taught God had revealed to him things which he had
“concealed from the Apostles;” which, perhaps, is only a
misrepresentation of what he taught on the doctrine of divine
influences.

AFFINITY. There are several degrees of affinity, wherein marriage was
prohibited by the law of Moses: thus the son could not marry his mother,
nor his father’s wife, Lev. xviii, 7, &c. The brother could not marry
his sister, whether she were so by the father only, or only by the
mother, and much less if she were his sister both by the same father and
mother. The grandfather could not marry his granddaughter, either by his
son or daughter. No one could marry the daughter of his father’s wife;
nor the sister of his father or mother; nor the uncle, his niece; nor
the aunt, her nephew; nor the nephew, the wife of his uncle by the
father’s side. The father-in-law could not marry his daughter-in-law;
nor the brother the wife of his brother, while living; nor even after
the death of his brother, if he left children. If he left no children,
the surviving brother was to raise up children to his deceased brother
by marrying his widow. It was forbidden to marry the mother and the
daughter at one time, or the daughter of the mother’s son, or the
daughter of her daughter, or two sisters, together.

It is true the patriarchs, before the law, married their sisters, as
Abraham married Sarah, who was his father’s daughter by another mother;
and two sisters together, as Jacob married Rachel and Leah; and their
own sisters, both by father and mother, as Seth and Cain. But these
cases are not to be proposed as examples; because in some they were
authorized by necessity; in others, by custom; and the law as yet was
not in being. If some other examples may be found, either before or
since the law, the Scripture expressly disapproves of them; as Reuben’s
incest with Balah, his father’s concubine; and the action of Amnon with
his sister Tamar; and that of Herod Antipas, who married Herodias, his
sister-in-law, his brother Philip’s wife, while her husband was yet
living; and that which St. Paul reproves and punishes among the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. v, 1.

AGABUS, a prophet, and as the Greeks say, one of the seventy disciples
of our Saviour. He foretold that there would be a great famine over all
the earth; which came to pass accordingly, under the emperor Claudius,
in the fourth year of his reign, A. D. 44, Acts xi, 28.

Ten years after this, as St. Paul was going to Jerusalem, and had
already landed at Cæsarea, in Palestine, the same prophet, Agabus,
arrived there, and coming to visit St. Paul and his company, he took
this Apostle’s girdle, and binding himself hand and feet, he said, “Thus
saith the Holy Ghost, So shall the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man that
owneth this girdle, and shall deliver him into the hands of the
Gentiles,” Acts xxi, 10. We know no other particulars of the life of
Agabus. The Greeks say that he suffered martyrdom at Antioch.

AGAG. This seems to have been a common name of the princes of Amalek,
one of whom was very powerful as early as the time of Moses, Num. xxiv,
7. On account of the cruelties exercised by this king and his army
against the Israelites, as they returned from Egypt, a bloody and long
contested battle took place between Joshua and the Amalekites, in which
the former was victorious, Exod. xvii, 8–13. At the same time, God
protested with an oath to destroy Amalek, verses 14–16; Deut. xxv,
17–19, A. M. 2513. About four hundred years after this, the Lord
remembered the cruel treatment of his people, and his own oath; and he
commanded Saul, by the mouth of Samuel, to destroy the Amalekites. Saul
mustered his army, and found it two hundred thousand strong, 1 Sam. xv,
1, &c. Having entered into their country, he cut in pieces all he could
meet with from Havilah to Shur. Agag their king, and the best of their
cattle, were however spared, an act of disobedience on the part of Saul,
probably dictated by covetousness. But Agag did not long enjoy this
reprieve; for Samuel no sooner heard that he was alive, than he sent for
him; and notwithstanding his insinuating address, and the vain hopes
with which he flattered himself that the bitterness of death was past,
he caused him to be hewed to pieces in Gilgal before the Lord, saying,
“As, כאשר, _in the same identical mode as_, thy sword hath made women
childless, so shall thy mother be childless among women.” This savage
chieftain had hewed many prisoners to death; and, therefore, by command
of the Judge of the whole earth, he was visited with the same punishment
which he had inflicted upon others.

AGAPÆ. See LOVE FEAST.

AGAR, mount Sinai, so called, Gal. iv, 24, 25. But this reading is
doubtful, many MSS. having the verse, “for this Sinai is a mountain of
Arabia.” Some critics however contend for the reading of the received
text, and urge that _Agar_, which signifies “a rocky mountain,” is the
Arabic name for _Sinai_.

AGATE, שבו, Exod. xxviii, 19; xxxix, 12. In the Septuagint ἀχάτης, and
Vulgate, _achates_. A precious stone, semi-pellucid. Its variegations
are sometimes most beautifully disposed, representing plants, trees,
rivers, clouds, &c. Its Hebrew name is, perhaps, derived from the
country whence the Jews imported it; for the merchants of Sheba brought
to the market of Tyre all kinds of precious stones, Ezek. xxvii, 22. The
agate was the second stone in the third row of the pectoral of the high
priest, Exod. xxviii, 19, and xxxix, 12.

AGE, in the most general sense of the term, denotes the duration of any
substance, animate or inanimate; and is applied either to the whole
period of its existence, or to that portion of it which precedes the
time to which the description of it refers. In this sense it is used to
signify either the whole natural duration of the LIFE of man, or any
interval of it that has elapsed before the period of which we speak.
When age is understood of a certain portion of the life of man, its
whole duration is divided into four different ages, viz. infancy, youth,
manhood, and old age: the first extending to the fourteenth year; the
second, denominated youth, adolescence, or the age of puberty,
commencing at fourteen, and terminating at about twenty-five; manhood,
or the virile age, concluding at fifty; and the last ending at the close
of life. Some divide the first period into infancy and childhood; and
the last likewise into two stages, calling that which succeeds the age
of seventy-five, decrepit old age. Age is applicable to the duration of
things inanimate or factitious; and in this use of the term we speak of
the age of a house, of a country, of a state or kingdom, &c.

AGE, in _chronology_, is used for a century, or a period of one hundred
years: in which sense it is the same with _seculum_, and differs from
_generation_. It is also used in speaking of the times past since the
creation of the world. The several ages of the world may be reduced to
three grand epochas, viz. the age of the law of nature, called by the
Jews the void age, from Adam to Moses. The age of the Jewish law, from
Moses to Christ, called by the Jews the present age. And the age of
grace, from Christ to the present year. The Jews call the third age, the
age to come, or the future age; denoting by it the time from the advent
of the Messiah to the end of the world. The Romans distinguished the
time that preceded them into three ages: the obscure or uncertain age,
which reached down as low as Ogyges king of Attica, in whose reign the
deluge happened in Greece; the fabulous or heroic age, which ended at
the first olympiad; and the historical age, which commenced at the
building of Rome. Among the poets, the four ages of the world are, the
golden, the silver, the brazen, and the iron age.

Age is sometimes used among the ancient poets in the same sense as
_generation_, or a period of thirty years. Thus Nestor is said to have
lived three ages, when he was ninety years old.

The period preceding the birth of Jesus Christ has been generally
divided into six ages. The first extends from the creation to the
deluge, and comprehends 1656 years. The second age, from the deluge to
Abraham’s entering the land of promise, A. M. 2082, comprehends 426
years. The third age from Abraham’s entrance into the promised land to
the Exodus, A. M. 2512, includes 430 years. The fourth age, from the
Exodus to the building of the temple by Solomon, A. M. 2992, contains
480 years. The fifth age from the foundation of Solomon’s temple to the
Babylonish captivity, A. M. 3416, comprehends 424 years. The sixth age,
from the Babylonish captivity to the birth of Jesus Christ, A. M. 4000,
the fourth year before the vulgar æra, includes 584 years. Those who
follow the Septuagint, or Greek version, divide this period into seven
ages, viz. 1. From the creation to the deluge, 2262 years. 2. From the
deluge to the confusion of tongues, 738 years. 3. From this confusion to
the calling of Abraham, 460 years. 4. From this period to Jacob’s
descent into Egypt, 215 years; and from this event to the Exodus, 430
years, making the whole 645 years. 5. From the Exodus to Saul, 774
years. 6. From Saul to Cyrus, 583 years. 7. From Cyrus to the vulgar æra
of Christians, 538 years; the whole period from the creation to this
period containing 6000 years.

AGRIPPA, surnamed Herod, the son of Aristobulus and Mariamne, and
grandson of Herod the Great, was born A. M. 3997, three years before the
birth of our Saviour, and seven years before the vulgar æra. After the
death of his father Aristobulus, Josephus informs us that Herod, his
grandfather, took care of his education, and sent him to Rome to make
his court to Tiberius. Agrippa, having a great inclination for Caius,
the son of Germanicus, and grandson of Antonia, chose to attach himself
to this prince, as if he had some prophetic views of the future
elevation of Caius, who at that time was beloved by all the world. The
great assiduity and agreeable behaviour of Agrippa so far won upon this
prince, that he was unable to live without him. Agrippa, being one day
in conversation with Caius, was overheard by one Eutychus, a slave whom
Agrippa had emancipated, to say that he should be glad to see the old
emperor take his departure for the other world and leave Caius master of
this, without meeting with any obstacle from the emperor’s grandson,
Tiberius Nero. Eutychus, some time after this, thinking he had reason to
be dissatisfied with Agrippa, communicated the conversation to the
emperor; whereupon Agrippa was loaded with fetters, and committed to the
custody of an officer. Soon after this, Tiberius dying, and Caius
Caligula succeeding him, the new emperor heaped many favours and much
wealth upon Agrippa, changed his iron fetters into a chain of gold, set
a royal diadem on his head, and gave him the tetrarchy which Philip, the
son of Herod the Great, had been possessed of, that is, Batanæa and
Trachonitis. To this he added that of Lysanias; and Agrippa returned
very soon into Judea, to take possession of his new kingdom. The emperor
Caius, desiring to be adored as a god, commanded to have his statue set
up in the temple of Jerusalem. But the Jews opposed this design with so
much resolution, that Petronius was forced to suspend his proceedings in
this affair, and to represent, in a letter to the emperor, the
resistance he met with from the Jews. Agrippa, who was then at Rome,
coming to the emperor at the very time he was reading the letter, Caius
told him that the Jews were the only people of all mankind who refused
to own him for a deity; and that they had taken arms to oppose his
resolution. At these words Agrippa fainted away, and, being carried home
to his house, continued in that state for a long time. As soon as he was
somewhat recovered, he wrote a long letter to Caius, wherein he
endeavoured to soften him; and his arguments made such an impression
upon the emperor’s mind, that he desisted, in appearance, from the
design which he had formed of setting up his statue in the temple. Caius
being killed in the beginning of the following year, A. D. 41, Agrippa,
who was then at Rome, contributed much by his advice to maintain
Claudius in possession of the imperial dignity, to which he had been
advanced by the army. The emperor, as an acknowledgment for his kind
offices, gave him all Judea, and the kingdom of Chalcis, which had been
possessed by Herod his brother. Thus Agrippa became of a sudden one of
the greatest princes of the east, and was possessed of as much, if not
more territory, than had been held by Herod the Great, his grandfather.
He returned to Judea, and governed it to the great satisfaction of the
Jews. But the desire of pleasing them, and a mistaken zeal for their
religion, induced him to put to death the Apostle James, and to cast
Peter into prison with the same design; and, but for a miraculous
interposition, which, however, produced no effect upon the mind of the
tyrant, his hands would have been imbrued in the blood of two Apostles,
the memory whereof is preserved in Scripture. At Cæsarea, he had games
performed in honour of Claudius. Here the inhabitants of Tyre and Sidon
waited on him to sue for peace. Agrippa being come early in the morning
into the theatre, with a design to give them audience, seated himself on
his throne, dressed in a robe of silver tissue, worked in the most
admirable manner. The rising sun darted his golden beams thereon, and
gave it such a lustre as dazzled the eyes of the spectators; and when
the king began his speech to the Tyrians and Sidonians, the parasites
around him began to say, it was “the voice of a god and not of man.”
Instead of rejecting these impious flatteries, Agrippa received them
with an air of complacency; and the angel of the Lord smote him because
he did not give God the glory. Being therefore carried home to his
palace, he died, at the end of five days, racked with tormenting pains
in his bowels, and devoured with worms. Such was the death of Herod
Agrippa, A. D. 44, after a reign of seven years. He left a son of the
same name, and three daughters--Bernice, who was married to her uncle
Herod, her father’s brother; Mariamne, betrothed to Julius Archelaus;
and Drusilla, promised to Epiphanius, the son of Archelaus, the son of
Comagena.

AGRIPPA, son of the former Agrippa, was at Rome with the emperor
Claudius when his father died. The emperor, we are told by Josephus, was
inclined to give him all the dominions that had been possessed by his
father, but was dissuaded from it, Agrippa being only seventeen years of
age; and he kept him therefore at his court four years.

Three years after this, Herod, king of Chalcis, and uncle to young
Agrippa, dying, the emperor gave his dominions to this prince, who,
notwithstanding, did not go into Judea till four years after, A. D. 53;
when, Claudius taking from him the kingdom of Chalcis, gave him the
provinces of Gaulonitis, Trachonitis, Batanæa, Paneas, and Abylene,
which formerly had been in the possession of Lysanias. After the death
of Claudius, his successor, Nero, who had a great affection for Agrippa,
to his other dominions added Julias in Peræa, and that part of Galilee
to which Tarichæa and Tiberias belonged. Festus governor of Judea,
coming to his government, A. D. 60, king Agrippa and Bernice, his
sister, went as far as Cæsarea to salute him; and as they continued
there for some time, Festus talked with the king concerning the affair
of St. Paul, who had been seized in the temple about two years before,
and within a few days previous to his visit had appealed to the emperor.
Agrippa wishing to hear Paul, that Apostle delivered that noble address
in his presence which is recorded, Acts xxvi.

AGUR. The thirtieth chapter of Proverbs begins with this title: “The
words of Agur, the son of Jakeh;” and the thirty-first, with “the words
of king Lemuel;” with respect to which some conjecture that Solomon
describes himself under these appellations; others, that these chapters
are the productions of persons whose real names are prefixed. Scripture
history, indeed, affords us no information respecting their situation
and character; but there must have been sufficient reason for regarding
their works in the light of inspired productions, or they would not have
been admitted into the sacred canon.

They are called _Massa_, a term frequently applied to the undoubted
productions of the prophetic Spirit; and it is not improbable that the
authors meant, by the adoption of this term, to lay claim to the
character of inspiration. A succession of virtuous and eminent men,
favoured with divine illuminations, flourished in Judea till the final
completion of the sacred code; and, most likely, many more than those
whose writings have been preserved. Agur may then have been one of those
prophets whom Divine providence raised up to comfort or admonish his
chosen people; and Lemuel may have been some neighbouring prince, the
son of a Jewish woman, by whom he was taught the Massa contained in the
thirty-first chapter. These, of course, can only be considered as mere
conjectures; for, in the absence of historic evidence, who can venture
to pronounce with certainty? The opinion, however, that Agur and Lemuel
are appellations of Solomon, is sanctioned by so many and such
respectable writers, that it demands a more particular examination.

The knowledge of names was anciently regarded as a matter of the highest
importance, in order to understand the nature of the persons or things
which they designate; and, in the opinion of the rabbins, was preferable
even to the study of the written law. The Heathens paid considerable
attention to it, as appears from the Cratylus of Plato; and some of the
Christian fathers entertained very favourable notions of such knowledge.
The Jewish doctors, it is true, refined upon the subject with an amazing
degree of subtilty, grounding upon it many ridiculous ideas and absurd
fancies; yet it is unquestionable that many of the proper names in
Scripture are significant and characteristic. Thus the names Eve, Cain,
Seth, Noah, Abraham, Israel, &c, were imposed by reason of their being
expressive of the several characters of the persons whom they represent.
Reasoning from analogy, we may infer that all the proper names in the
Old Testament, at their original imposition, were intended to denote
some quality or circumstance in the person or thing to which they
belong; and though many, from transference, have ceased to be personally
characteristic, yet are they all significative.

As the custom of imposing descriptive names prevailed in the primitive
ages, it is not impossible that Agur and Lemuel may be appropriated to
Solomon, and Jakeh to David as mystic appellations significative of
their respective characters. It is even some confirmation of this
opinion, that Solomon is denominated Jedidiah (beloved of the Lord) by
the Prophet Nathan; and that in the book of Ecclesiastes, he styles
himself Koheleth, or the Preacher. Nevertheless, this hypothesis does
not appear to rest upon a firm foundation. It is foreign to the
simplicity of the sacred penmen, and contrary to their custom in similar
cases, to adopt a mystic name, without either explaining it, or alleging
the reasons for its adoption. In the names Eve, Cain, Seth, Noah, &c,
before alluded to; in the appellation Nabal; in the enigmatical names in
the first chapter of Hosea; in the descriptive names given to places, as
Beersheba, Jehovah-jireh, Peniel, Bethel, Gilgal; and in many other
instances, the meaning of the terms is either explained, or the
circumstances are mentioned which led to their selection. When Solomon
is called Jedidiah, it is added that it was “because of the Lord;” and
when he styles himself Koheleth, an explanatory clause is annexed,
describing himself “the son of David, the king of Jerusalem.” But if
Solomon be meant by the titles Agur and Lemuel, he is so called without
any statement of the reasons for their application, and without any
explanation of their import; a circumstance unusual with the sacred
writers, and the reverse to what is practised in the book of Proverbs,
where his proper name, Solomon, is attributed to him in three different
places. Nor is anything characteristic of the Jewish monarchs
discoverable in the terms themselves. Jakeh, which denotes _obedient_,
is no more applicable to David than to Nathan, or any other personage of
eminent worth and piety among the Israelites. The name of Agur is not of
easy explanation; some giving it the sense of _recollectus_, that is,
recovered from his errors, and become penitent; an explanation more
applicable to David than to Solomon. Simon, in his lexicon, says it may
perhaps denote “him who applies to the study of wisdom;” an
interpretation very suitable to the royal philosopher, but not supported
by adequate authority; and in his Onomasticon he explains it in a
different manner. Others suppose that it means _collector_; though it
has been argued, that, as it has a passive form, it cannot have an
active sense. But this is not a valid objection, as several examples may
be produced from the Bible of a similar form with an active
signification. If such be its meaning, it is suitable to Solomon, who
was not the collector or compiler, but the author, of the Proverbs. With
respect to the name Lemuel, it signifies one that is for God, or devoted
to God; and is not, therefore, peculiarly descriptive of Solomon. It
appears, then, that nothing can be inferred from the signification of
the names Agur and Lemuel in support of the conjecture, that they are
appellations of Solomon. The contents, likewise, of the two chapters in
question strongly militate against this hypothesis.

When all these circumstances are taken into consideration, together with
the extreme improbability that Solomon should be denominated three times
by his proper name, and afterward, in the same work, by two different
enigmatical names, we are fully warranted in rejecting the notion, that
the wise monarch is designed by the appellations Agur and Lemuel. And it
seems most reasonable to consider them as denoting real persons.

AHAB, the son and successor of Omri. He began his reign over Israel, A.
M. 3086, and reigned 22 years. In impiety he far exceeded all the kings
of Israel. He married Jezebel, the daughter of Ethbaal, king of Zidon,
who introduced the whole abominations and idols of her country, Baal and
Ashtaroth.

2. AHAB the son of Kolaiah, and Zedekiah the son of Maaseiah, were two
false prophets, who, about A. M. 3406, seduced the Jewish captives at
Babylon with hopes of a speedy deliverance, and stirred them up against
Jeremiah. The Lord threatened them with a public and ignominious death,
before such as they had deceived; and that their names should become a
curse; men wishing that their foes might be made like Ahab and Zedekiah,
whom Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon roasted in the fire, Jer. xxix, 21,
22.

AHASUERUS was the king of Persia, who advanced Esther to be queen, and
at her request delivered the Jews from the destruction plotted for them
by Haman. Archbishop Usher is of opinion that this Ahasuerus was Darius
Hystaspes; and that Atossa was the Vashti, and Artystona the Esther, of
the Scriptures. But, according to Herodotus, the latter was the daughter
of Cyrus, and therefore could not be Esther; and the former had four
sons by Darius, besides daughters, born to him after he was king; and
therefore she could not be the queen Vashti, divorced from her husband
in the third year of his reign, nor he the Ahasuerus who divorced her.
Besides, Atossa retained her influence over Darius to his death, and
obtained the succession of the crown for his son, Xerxes; whereas Vashti
was removed from the presence of Ahasuerus by an irrevocable decree,
Esther i, 19. Joseph Scaliger maintains that Xerxes was the Ahasuerus,
and Hamestris his queen, the Esther, of Scripture. The opinion is
founded on the similitude of names, but contradicted by the
dissimilitude of the characters of Hamestris and Esther. Besides,
Herodotus says that Xerxes had a son by Hamestris that was marriageable
in the seventh year of his reign; and therefore she could not be Esther.
The Ahasuerus of Scripture, according to Dr. Prideaux, was Artaxerxes
Longimanus. Josephus positively says that this was the person. The
Septuagint, through the whole book of Esther, uses Artaxerxes for the
Hebrew Ahasuerus wherever the appellation occurs; and the apocryphal
additions to that book every where call the husband of Esther
Artaxerxes; and he could be no other than Artaxerxes Longimanus. The
extraordinary favour shown to the Jews by this king, first in sending
Ezra, and afterward Nehemiah, to relieve this people, and restore them
to their ancient prosperity, affords strong presumptive evidence that
they had near his person and high in his regard such an advocate as
Esther. Ahasuerus is also a name given in Scripture, Ezra iv, 6, to
Cambyses, the son of Cyrus; and to Astyages, king of the Medes, Dan. ix,
1.

AHAVA. The name of a river of Babylonia, or rather of Assyria, where
Ezra assembled those captives whom he afterward brought into Judea, Ezra
viii, 15. The river Ahava is thought to be that which ran along the
Adabene, where a river Diava, or Adiava, is mentioned, and on which
Ptolemy places the city Abane or Aavane. This is probably the country
called Ava, whence the kings of Assyria translated the people called
Avites into Palestine, and where they settled some of the captive
Israelites, 2 Kings xvii, 24; xviii, 34; xix, 13; xvii, 31. Ezra,
intending to collect as many Israelites as he could, who might return to
Judea, halted in the country of Ava, or Aahava, whence he sent agents
into the Caspian mountains, to invite such Jews as were willing to join
him, Ezra viii, 16. The history of Izates, king of the Adiabenians, and
of his mother Helena, who became converts to Judaism some years after
the death of Jesus Christ, sufficiently proves that there were many Jews
still settled in that country.

AHAZ succeeded his father Jotham, as king of Israel, at the age of
twenty years, reigned till the year before Christ, 726, and addicted
himself to the practice of idolatry. After the customs of the Heathen,
he made his children to pass through fire; he shut up the temple, and
destroyed its vessels. He became tributary to Tiglath-pileser, whose
assistance he supplicated against the kings of Syria and Israel. Such
was his impiety, that he was not allowed burial in the sepulchres of the
kings of Israel, 2 Kings xvi; 2 Chron. xxviii.

AHAZIAH, the son of Ahab, king of Israel. Ahaziah reigned two years,
partly alone, and partly with his father Ahab, who appointed him his
associate in the kingdom a year before his death. Ahaziah imitated his
father’s impieties, 1 Kings xxii, 52, &c, and paid his adorations to
Baal and Ashtaroth, the worship of whom had been introduced into Israel
by Jezebel his mother. The Moabites, who had been always obedient to the
kings of the ten tribes, ever since their separation from the kingdom of
Judah, revolted after the death of Ahab, and refused to pay the ordinary
tribute. Ahaziah had not leisure or power to reduce them, 2 Kings i, 1,
2, &c, for, about the same time, having fallen through a lattice from
the top of his house, he was considerably injured, and sent messengers
to Ekron to consult Baalzebub, the god of that place, whether he should
recover, 2 Kings i, 1–17. Elijah met the messengers, and informed them
he should certainly die; and he died accordingly.

2. AHAZIAH, king of Judah, the son of Jehoram and Athaliah. He succeeded
his father in the kingdom of Judah, A. M. 3119; being in the
twenty-second year of his age, 2 Kings viii, 26, &c; and he reigned one
year only in Jerusalem. He walked in the ways of Ahab’s house, to which
he was related, his mother being of that family. Joram, king of Israel,
2 Kings viii, going to attack Ramoth Gilead, which the kings of Syria
had taken from his predecessors, was there dangerously wounded, and
carried by his own appointment to Jezreel, for the purpose of surgical
assistance. Ahaziah, Joram’s friend and relation, accompanied him in
this war, and came afterward to visit him at Jezreel. In the meantime,
Jehu, the son of Nimshi, whom Joram had left besieging the fortress of
Ramoth, rebelled against his master, and set out with a design of
extirpating the house of Ahab, according to the commandment of the Lord,
2 Kings ix. Joram and Ahaziah, who knew nothing of his intentions, went
to meet him. Jehu killed Joram dead upon the spot: Ahaziah fled, but
Jehu’s people overtook him at the going up of Gur, and mortally wounded
him; notwithstanding which, he had strength enough to reach Megiddo,
where he died. His servants, having laid him in his chariot, carried him
to Jerusalem, where he was buried with his fathers, in the city of
David.

AHIJAH, the prophet of the Lord, who dwelt in Shiloh. He is thought to
be the person who spoke twice to Solomon from God, once while he was
building the temple, 1 Kings vi, 11, at which time he promised him the
divine protection; and again, 1 Kings xi, 11, after his falling into his
irregularities, with great threatenings and reproaches. Ahijah was one
of those who wrote the history or annals of this prince, 2 Chron. ix,
29. The same prophet declared to Jeroboam, that he would usurp the
kingdom, 1 Kings xi, 29, &c; and, about the end of Jeroboam’s reign, he
also predicted the death of Abijah, the only pious son of that prince,
as is recorded 1 Kings xiv, 2, &c. Ahijah, in all probability, did not
long survive the delivery of this last prophecy; but we are not informed
of the time and manner of his death.

AHIKAM, the son of Shaphan, and father of Gedaliah. He was sent by
Josiah, king of Judah, to Huldah the prophetess, 2 Kings xxii, 12, to
consult her concerning the book of the law, which had been found in the
temple.

AHIMAAZ, the son of Zadok, the high priest. Ahimaaz succeeded his father
under the reign of Solomon. He performed a very important piece of
service for David during the war with Absalom. While his father Zadok
was in Jerusalem, 2 Sam. xv, 29, Ahimaaz and Jonathan continued without
the city, xvii, 17, near En-Rogel, or the fountain of Rogel; thither a
maid servant came to tell them the resolution which had been taken in
Absalom’s council: whereupon they immediately departed to give the king
intelligence. But being discovered by a young lad who gave information
concerning them to Absalom, that prince sent orders to pursue them:
Ahimaaz and Jonathan, fearing to be taken, retired to a man’s house at
Baharim, in whose court-yard there was a well, wherein they concealed
themselves. After the battle, in which Absalom was overcome and slain,
xviii, Ahimaaz desired leave of Joab to carry the news thereof to David.
But instead of him Joab sent Cushi to carry the news, and told Ahimaaz
that he would send him to the king upon some other occasion; but soon
after Cushi was departed, Ahimaaz applied again to Joab, praying to be
permitted to run after Cushi; and, having obtained leave, he ran by the
way of the plain, and outran Cushi. He was succeeded in the priesthood
by his son Azariah.

AHIMELECH. He was the son of Ahitub, and brother of Ahia, whom he
succeeded in the high priesthood. He is called Abiathar, Mark ii, 26.
During his priesthood the tabernacle was at Nob, where Ahimelech, with
other priests, had their habitation. David, being informed by his friend
Jonathan that Saul was determined to destroy him, thought it prudent to
retire. He therefore went to Nob, to the high priest Ahimelech, who gave
him the shew bread, and the sword of Goliath. One day, when Saul was
complaining of his officers, that no one was affected with his
misfortunes, or gave him any intelligence of what was carrying on
against him, 1 Sam. xxii, 9, &c, Doeg related to him what had occurred
when David came to Ahimelech the high priest. On this information, Saul
convened the priests, and having charged them with the crime of treason,
ordered his guards to slay them, which they refusing to do, Doeg, who
had been their accuser, at the king’s command became their executioner,
and with his sacrilegious hand massacred no less than eighty-five of
them; the Septuagint and Syriac versions make the number of priests
slain by Doeg three hundred and five. Nor did Saul stop here; but,
sending a party to Nob, he commanded them to slay men, women, and
children, and even cattle, with the edge of the sword. Only one son of
Ahimelech, named Abiathar, escaped the carnage and fled to David.

AHITHOPHEL, a native of Giloh, who, after having been David’s
counsellor, joined in the rebellion of Absalom, and assisted him with
his advice. Hushai, the friend of David, was employed to counteract the
counsels of Ahithophel, and to deprive Absalom, under a pretence of
serving him, of the advantage that was likely to result from the
measures which he proposed. One of these measures was calculated to
render David irreconcilable, and was immediately adopted; and the other
to secure, or to slay him. Before the last counsel was followed,
Hushai’s advice was desired; and he recommended their assembling
together the whole force of Israel, putting Absalom at their head, and
overwhelming David by their number. The treacherous counsel of Hushai
was preferred to that of Ahithophel; with which the latter being
disgusted he hastened to his house at Giloh, where he put an end to his
life. He probably foresaw Absalom’s defeat, and dreaded the punishment
which would be inflicted on himself as a traitor, when David was
resettled on the throne. A. M. 2981. B. C. 1023. 2 Sam. xv, xvii.

AHOLIBAH. This and Aholah are two feigned names made use of by Ezekiel,
xxiii, 4, to denote the two kingdoms of Judah and Samaria. Aholah and
Aholibah are represented as two sisters of Egyptian extraction. Aholah
stands for Samaria, and Aholibah for Jerusalem. The first signifies a
_tent_, and the second, _my tent is in her_. They both prostituted
themselves to the Egyptians and Assyrians, in imitating their
abominations and idolatries; for which reason the Lord abandoned them to
those very people for whose evil practices they had shown so passionate
an affection. They were carried into captivity, and reduced to the
severest servitude.

AI, called by the LXX, Gai, by Josephus Aina, and by others Ajah, a town
of Palestine, situate west of Bethel, and at a small distance north-west
of Jericho. The three thousand men, first sent by Joshua to reduce this
city, were repulsed, on account of the sin of Achan, who had violated
the anathema pronounced against Jericho, by appropriating a part of the
spoil. After the expiation of this offence, the whole army of Israel
marched against Ai, with orders to treat that city as Jericho had been
treated, with this difference, that the plunder was to be given to the
army. Joshua, having appointed an ambush of thirty thousand men, marched
against the city, and by a feigned retreat, drew out the king of Ai with
his troops; and upon a signal given by elevating his shield on the top
of a pike, the men in ambush entered the city and set fire to it. Thus
the soldiers of Ai, placed between two divisions of Joshua’s army, were
all destroyed; the king alone being preserved for a more ignominious
death on a gibbet, where he hung till sunset. The spoil of the place was
afterward divided among the Israelites. The men appointed for ambush
are, in one place, said to be thirty thousand, and in another five
thousand. For reconciling this apparent contradiction, most commentators
have generally supposed, that there were two bodies placed in ambuscade
between Bethel and Ai, one of twenty-five thousand and the other of five
thousand men; the latter being probably a detachment from the thirty
thousand first sent, and ordered to lie as near to the city as possible.
Masius allows only five thousand men for the ambuscade, and twenty-five
thousand for the attack.

AICHMALOTARCH, Ἀιχμαλοτάρχης signifies _the prince of the captivity_, or
_chief of the captives_. The Jews pretend that this was the title of him
who had the government of their people during the captivity of Babylon;
and they believe these princes or governors to have been constantly of
the tribe of Judah, and family of David. But they give no satisfactory
proof of the real existence of these Aichmalotarchs. There was no prince
of the captivity before the end of the second century, from which period
the office continued till the eleventh century. The princes of the
captivity resided at Babylon, where they were installed with great
ceremony, held courts of justice, &c, and were set over the eastern
Jews, or those settled in Babylon, Chaldæa, Assyria, and Persia. Thus
they affected to restore the splendour of their ancient monarchy, and in
this view the following account may be amusing. The ceremonial of the
installation is thus described: The spiritual heads of the people, the
masters of the learned schools, the elders, and the people, assembled in
great multitudes within a stately chamber, adorned with rich curtains,
in Babylon, where, during his days of splendour, the Resch-Glutha fixed
his residence. The prince was seated on a lofty throne. The heads of the
schools of Sura and Pumbeditha on his right hand and left. These chiefs
of the learned men then delivered an address, exhorting the new monarch
not to abuse his power; and reminded him that he was called to slavery
rather than to sovereignty, for he was prince of a captive people. On
the next Thursday he was inaugurated by the laying on of hands, and the
sound of trumpets, and acclamations. He was escorted to his palace with
great pomp, and received magnificent presents from all his subjects. On
the Sabbath all the principal people being assembled before his house,
he placed himself at their head, and, with his face covered with a
silken veil, proceeded to the synagogue. Benedictions and hymns of
thanksgiving announced his entrance. They then brought him the book of
the law, out of which he read the first line, afterward he addressed the
assembly, with his eyes closed out of respect. He exhorted them to
charity, and set the example by offering liberal alms to the poor. The
ceremony closed with new acclamations, and prayers to God that, under
the new prince, he would be pleased to put an end to their calamities.
The prince gave his blessing to the people, and prayed for each
province, that it might be preserved from war and famine. He concluded
his orisons in a low voice, lest his prayer should be repeated to the
jealous ears of the native monarchs, for he prayed for the restoration
of the kingdom of Israel, which could not rise but on the ruins of their
empire. The prince returned to his palace, where he gave a splendid
banquet to the chief persons of the community. After that day he lived
in a sort of stately oriental seclusion, never quitting his palace,
except to go to the schools of the learned, where, as he entered, the
whole assembly rose and continued standing, till he took his seat. He
sometimes paid a visit to the native sovereign in Babylon (Bagdad.) This
probably refers to a somewhat later period. On these great occasions his
imperial host sent his own chariot for his guest; but the prince of the
captivity dared not accept the invidious distinction, he walked in
humble and submissive modesty behind the chariot. Yet his own state was
by no means wanting in splendour: he was arrayed in cloth of gold; fifty
guards marched before him; all the Jews who met him on the way paid
their homage, and fell behind into his train. He was received by the
eunuchs, who conducted him to the throne, while one of his officers, as
he marched slowly along, distributed gold and silver on all sides. As
the prince approached the imperial throne, he prostrated himself on the
ground, in token of vassalage. The eunuchs raised him and placed him on
the left hand of the sovereign. After the first salutation, the prince
represented the grievances, or discussed the affairs, of his people.

The court of the Resch-Glutha is described as splendid. In imitation of
his Persian master, he had his officers, counsellors, and cup-bearers;
and rabbins were appointed as satraps over the different communities.
This state, it is probable, was maintained by a tribute raised from the
body of the people, and substituted for that which, in ancient times was
paid for the temple in Jerusalem. His subjects in Babylonia were many of
them wealthy.

AIJALON, a city of the Canaanites; the valley adjoining to which is
memorable in sacred history from the miracle of Joshua, in arresting the
course of the sun and moon, that the Israelites might have sufficient
light to pursue their enemies, Joshua x, 12, 13. Aijalon was afterward a
Levitical city, and belonged to the tribe of Dan; who did not, however,
drive out the Amorite inhabitants, Judges i, 35.

AIR, that thin, fluid, elastic, transparent, ponderous, compressible
body which surrounds the terraqueous globe to a considerable height. In
Scripture it is sometimes used for _heaven_; as, “the birds of the air;”
“the birds of heaven.” To “beat the air,” and “to speak to the air,” 1
Cor. ix, 26, signify to fatigue ourselves in vain, and to speak to no
purpose. “The prince of the power of the air” is the head and chief of
the evil spirits, with which both Jews and Heathens thought the air was
filled.

ALABASTER, Ἀλάβαϛρον, the name of a genus of fossils nearly allied to
marble. It is a bright elegant stone, sometimes of a snowy whiteness. It
may be cut freely, and is capable of a fine polish; and, being of a soft
nature, it is wrought into any form or figure with ease. Vases or
cruises were anciently made of it, wherein to preserve odoriferous
liquors and ointments. Pliny and others represent it as peculiarly
proper for this purpose; and the druggists in Egypt have, at this day,
vessels made of it, in which they keep their medicines and perfumes.

In Matt. xxvi, 6, 7, we read that Jesus being at table in Bethany, in
the house of Simon the leper, a woman came thither and poured an
alabaster box of ointment on his head. St. Mark adds, “She brake the
box,” which merely refers to the seal upon the vase which closed it, and
kept the perfume from evaporating. This had never been removed, but was
on this occasion broken, that is, first opened.

ALBIGENSES. See WALDENSES.

ALEPH, א, the name of the first letter in the Hebrew alphabet, from
which the alpha of the Syrians and Greeks was formed. This word
signifies, _prince_, _chief_, or _thousand_, expressing, as it were, a
leading number.

ALEXANDER, commonly called the Great, son and successor of Philip, king
of Macedon, is denoted in the prophecies of Daniel by a leopard with
four wings, signifying his great strength, and the unusual rapidity of
his conquests, Dan. vii, 6; and by a one-horned he-goat running over the
earth so swiftly as not to touch it, attacking a ram with two horns,
overthrowing him, and trampling him under foot, without any being able
to rescue him, Dan. viii, 4–7. The he-goat prefigured Alexander; the
ram, Darius Codomannus, the last of the Persian kings. In the statue
beheld by Nebuchadnezzar in his dream, Dan. ii, 39, the belly of brass
was the emblem of Alexander. He was appointed by God to destroy the
Persian empire, and to substitute in its room the Grecian monarchy.

Alexander succeeded his father Philip, A. M. 3668, and B. C. 336. He was
chosen, by the Greeks, general of their troops against the Persians, and
entered Asia at the head of thirty-four thousand men, A. M. 3670. In one
campaign, he subdued almost all Asia Minor; and afterward defeated, in
the narrow passes which led from Syria to Cilicia, the army of Darius,
which consisted of four hundred thousand foot, and one hundred thousand
horse. Darius fled, and left in the hands of the conqueror, his camp,
baggage, children, wife, and mother.

After subduing Syria, Alexander came to Tyre; and the Tyrians refusing
him entrance into their city, he besieged it. At the same time he wrote
to Jaddus, high priest of the Jews, that he expected to be acknowledged
by him, and to receive from him the same submission which had hitherto
been paid to the king of Persia. Jaddus refusing to comply under the
plea of having sworn fidelity to Darius, Alexander resolved to march
against Jerusalem, when he had reduced Tyre. After a long siege, this
city was taken and sacked; and Alexander entered Palestine, A. M. 3672,
and subjected it to his obedience. As he was marching against Jerusalem,
the Jews became greatly alarmed, and had recourse to prayers and
sacrifices. The Lord, in a dream, commanded Jaddus to open the gates to
the conqueror, and, at the head of his people, dressed in his pontifical
ornaments, and attended by the priests in their robes, to advance and
meet the Macedonian king. Jaddus obeyed; and Alexander perceiving this
company approaching, hastened toward the high priest, whom he saluted.
He then adored God, whose name was engraven on a thin plate of gold,
worn by the high priest upon his forehead. The kings of Syria who
accompanied him, and the great officers about Alexander, could not
comprehend the meaning of his conduct. Parmenio alone ventured to ask
him why he adored the Jewish high priest; Alexander replied, that he
paid this respect to God, and not to the high priest. “For,” added he,
“whilst I was yet in Macedonia, I saw the God of the Jews, who appeared
to me in the same form and dress as the high priest at present, and who
encouraged me and commanded me to march boldly into Asia, promising that
he would be my guide, and give me the empire of the Persians. As soon,
therefore, as I perceived this habit, I recollected the vision, and
understood that my undertaking was favoured by God, and that under his
protection I might expect prosperity.”

Having said this, Alexander accompanied Jaddus to Jerusalem, where he
offered sacrifices in the temple according to the directions of the high
priest. Jaddus is said to have showed him the prophecies of Daniel, in
which the destruction of the Persian empire by Alexander is declared.
The king was therefore confirmed in his opinion, that God had chosen him
to execute this great work. At his departure, Alexander bade the Jews
ask of him what they would. The high priest desired only the liberty of
living under his government according to their own laws, and an
exemption from tribute every seventh year, because in that year the Jews
neither tilled their grounds, nor reaped their fruits. With this request
Alexander readily complied.

Having left Jerusalem, Alexander visited other cities of Palestine, and
was every where received with great testimonies of friendship and
submission. The Samaritans who dwelt at Sichem, and were apostates from
the Jewish religion, observing how kindly Alexander had treated the
Jews, resolved to say that they also were by religion Jews. For it was
their practice, when they saw the affairs of the Jews in a prosperous
state, to boast that they were descended from Manasseh and Ephraim; but
when they thought it their interest to say the contrary, they failed not
to affirm, and even to swear, that they were not related to the Jews.
They came, therefore, with many demonstrations of joy, to meet
Alexander, as far almost as the territories of Jerusalem. Alexander
commended their zeal; and the Sichemites entreated him to visit their
temple and city. Alexander promised this at his return; but as they
petitioned him for the same privileges as the Jews, he asked them if
they were Jews. They replied, they were Hebrews, and were called by the
Phœnicians, Sichemites. Alexander said that he had granted this
exemption only to the Jews, but that at his return he would inquire into
the affair, and do them justice.

This prince having conquered Egypt, and regulated it, gave orders for
the building of the city of Alexandria, and departed thence, about
spring, in pursuit of Darius. Passing through Palestine, he was informed
that the Samaritans, in a general insurrection, had killed Andromachus,
governor of Syria and Palestine, who had come to Samaria to regulate
some affairs. This action greatly incensed Alexander, who loved
Andromachus. He therefore commanded all those who were concerned in his
murder to be put to death, and the rest to be banished from Samaria; and
settled a colony of Macedonians in their room. What remained of their
lands he gave to the Jews, and exempted them from the payment of
tribute. The Samaritans who escaped this calamity, retired to Sichem, at
the foot of mount Gerizim, which afterward became their capital. Lest
the eight thousand men of this nation, who were in the service of
Alexander, and had accompanied him since the siege of Tyre, if permitted
to return to their own country, should renew the spirit of rebellion, he
sent them into Thebais, the most remote southern province of Egypt,
where he assigned them lands.

Alexander, after defeating Darius in a pitched battle, and subduing all
Asia and the Indies with incredible rapidity, gave himself up to
intemperance. Having drunk to excess, he fell sick and died, after he
had obliged “all the world to be quiet before him,” 1 Macc. i, 3. Being
sensible that his end was near, he sent for the grandees of his court,
and declared that “he gave the empire to the most deserving.” Some
affirm that he regulated the succession by a will. The author of the
first book of Maccabees says, that he divided his kingdom among his
generals while he was living, 1 Macc. i, 7. This he might do; or he
might express his foresight of what actually took place after his death.
It is certain, that a partition was made of Alexander’s dominions among
the four principal officers of his army, and that the empire which he
founded in Asia subsisted for many ages. Alexander died, A. M. 3684, and
B. C. 323, in the thirty-third year of his age, and the twelfth of his
reign. The above particulars of Alexander are here introduced because,
from his invasion of Palestine, the intercourse of the Jews with the
Greeks became intimate, and influenced many events of their subsequent
history.

On the account above given of the interview between Alexander and the
Jewish high priest, by Josephus, many doubts have been cast by critics.
But the sudden change of his feelings toward them, and the favour with
which the nation was treated by him, render the story not improbable.

ALEXANDRIA, a famous city of Egypt, and, during the reign of the
Ptolemies, the regal capital of that kingdom. It was founded by
Alexander the Great: who being struck with the advantageous situation of
the spot where the city afterward stood, ordered its immediate erection;
drew the plan of the city himself, and peopled it with colonies of
Greeks and Jews: to which latter people, in particular, he gave great
encouragement. They were, in fact, made free citizens, and had all the
privileges of Macedonians granted to them; which liberal policy
contributed much to the rise and prosperity of the new city; for this
enterprising and commercial people knew much better than either the
Greeks or the Egyptians how to turn the happy situation of Alexandria to
the best account. The fall of Tyre happening about the same time, the
trade of that city was soon drawn to Alexandria, which became the centre
of commercial intercourse between the east and the west; and in process
of time grew to such an extent, in magnitude and wealth, as to be second
in point of population and magnificence to none but Rome itself.

Alexandria owed much of its celebrity as well as its population to the
Ptolemies. Ptolemy Soter, one of Alexander’s captains, who, after the
death of this monarch, was first governor of Egypt, and afterward
assumed the title of king, made this city the place of his residence,
about B. C. 304. This prince founded an academy, called the Museum, in
which a society of learned men devoted themselves to philosophical
studies, and the improvement of all the other sciences; and he also gave
them a library, which was prodigiously increased by his successors. He
likewise induced the merchants of Syria and Greece to reside in this
city, and to make it a principal mart of their commerce. His son and
successor, Ptolemy Philadelphus, pursued the designs of his father.

In the hands of the Romans, the successors of the Macedonians in the
government of Egypt, the trade of Alexandria continued to flourish,
until luxury and licentiousness paved the way, as in every similar
instance, for its overthrow.

Alexandria, together with the rest of Egypt, passed from the dominion of
the Romans to that of the Saracens. With this event, the sun of
Alexandria may be said to have set: the blighting hand of Islamism was
laid on it; and although the genius and the resources of such a city
could not be immediately destroyed, it continued to languish until the
passage by the Cape of Good Hope, in the fifteenth century, gave a new
channel to the trade which for so many centuries had been its support;
and at this day, Alexandria, like most eastern cities, presents a mixed
spectacle of ruins and wretchedness,--of fallen greatness and enslaved
human beings.

Some idea may be formed of the extent and grandeur of Alexandria, by the
boast made by Amrou: “I have taken,” said he, “the great city of the
west. It is impossible for me to enumerate the variety of its riches and
beauty. I shall content myself with observing, that it contains four
thousand palaces, four thousand baths, four hundred theatres or places
of amusement, twelve thousand shops for the sale of vegetable foods, and
forty thousand tributary Jews.”

It was in Alexandria chiefly that the Grecian philosophy was engrafted
upon the stock of ancient oriental wisdom. The Egyptian method of
teaching by allegory was peculiarly favourable to such a union: and we
may well suppose that when Alexander, in order to preserve by the arts
of peace that extensive empire which he had obtained by the force of
arms, endeavoured to incorporate the customs of the Greeks with those of
the Persian, Indian, and other eastern nations, the opinions as well as
the manners of this feeble and obsequious race would, in a great
measure, be accommodated to those of their conquerors. This influence of
the Grecian upon the oriental philosophy continued long after the time
of Alexander, and was one principal occasion of the confusion of
opinions which occurs in the history of the Alexandrian and Christian
schools. Alexander, when he built the city of Alexandria, with a
determination to make it the seat of his empire, and peopled it with
emigrants from various countries, opened a new mart of philosophy, which
emulated the fame of Athens itself. A general indulgence was granted to
the promiscuous crowd assembled in this rising city, whether Egyptians,
Grecians, Jews, or others, to profess their respective systems of
philosophy without molestation. The consequence was, that Egypt was soon
filled with religious and philosophical sectaries of every kind; and
particularly, that almost every Grecian sect found an advocate and
professor in Alexandria. The family of the Ptolemies, as we have seen,
who after Alexander obtained the government of Egypt, from motives of
policy encouraged this new establishment. Ptolemy Lagus, who had
obtained the crown of Egypt by usurpation, was particularly careful to
secure the interest of the Greeks in his favour, and with this view
invited people from every part of Greece to settle in Egypt, and removed
the schools of Athens to Alexandria. This enlightened prince spared no
pains to raise the literary, as well as the civil, military, and
commercial credit of his country. Under the patronage first of the
Egyptian princes, and afterward of the Roman emperors, Alexandria long
continued to enjoy great celebrity as the seat of learning, and to send
forth eminent philosophers of every sect to distant countries. It
remained a school of learning, as well as a commercial emporium, till it
was taken, and plundered of its literary treasures by the Saracens.
Philosophy, during this period, suffered a grievous corruption from the
attempt which was made by philosophers of different sects and countries,
Grecian, Egyptian, and oriental, who were assembled in Alexandria, to
frame, from their different tenets, one general system of opinions. The
respect which had long been universally paid to the schools of Greece,
and the honours with which they were now adorned by the Egyptian
princes, induced other wise men, and even the Egyptian priests and
philosophers themselves, to submit to this innovation. Hence arose a
heterogeneous mass of opinions, under the name of the _Eclectic
philosophy_, and which was the foundation of endless confusion, error,
and absurdity, not only in the Alexandrian school, but among Jews and
Christians; producing among the former that specious kind of philosophy,
which they called their _Cabala_, and among the latter innumerable
corruptions of the Christian faith.

At Alexandria there was, in a very early period of the Christian æra, a
Christian school of considerable eminence. St. Jerome says, the school
at Alexandria had been in being from the time of St. Mark. Pantænus,
placed by Lardner at the year 192, presided in it. St. Clement of
Alexandria succeeded Pantænus in this school about the year 190; and he
was succeeded by Origen. The extensive commerce of Alexandria, and its
proximity to Palestine, gave an easy entrance to the new religion, and
when Adrian visited Egypt, he found a church composed of Jews and
Greeks, sufficiently important to attract the notice of that inquisitive
prince. The theological system of Plato was introduced into both the
philosophical and Christian schools of Alexandria; and of course many of
his sentiments and expressions were blended with the opinions and
language of the professors and teachers of Christianity.

Alexandria was the source, and for some time the principal stronghold,
of Arianism; which had its name from its founder, Arius, a presbyter of
the church of this city, about the year 315. His doctrines were
condemned by a council held here in the year 320; and afterward by a
general council of three hundred and eighty fathers, held at Nice, by
order of Constantine, in 325. These doctrines, however, which suited the
reigning taste for disputative theology, and the pride and
self-sufficiency of nominal Christians, better than the unsophisticated
simplicity of the Gospel, spread widely and rapidly notwithstanding.
Arius was steadfastly opposed by the celebrated Athanasius, bishop of
Alexandria, the intrepid champion of the catholic faith, who was raised
to the archiepiscopal throne of Alexandria in 326.

This city was, in 415, distinguished by a fierce persecution of the Jews
by the patriarch Cyril. They who had enjoyed the rights of citizens, and
the freedom of religious worship, for seven hundred years, ever since
the foundation of the city, incurred the hatred of this ecclesiastic;
who, in his zeal for the extermination of heretics of every kind, pulled
down their synagogues, plundered their property, and expelled them, to
the number of forty thousand, from the city.

It was in a ship belonging to the port of Alexandria, that St. Paul
sailed from Myra, a city of Lycia, on his way to Rome, Acts xxvii, 5, 6.
Alexandria was also the native place of Apollos.

ALEXANDRIAN LIBRARY. This celebrated collection of books was first
founded by Ptolemy Soter, for the use of the academy, or society of
learned men, which he had founded at Alexandria. Beside the books which
he procured, his son, Ptolemy Philadelphus, added many more, and left in
this library at his death a hundred thousand volumes; and the succeeding
princes of this race enlarged it still more, till at length the books
lodged in it amounted to the number of seven hundred thousand volumes.
The method by which they are said to have collected these books was
this: they seized all the books that were brought by the Greeks or other
foreigners into Egypt, and sent them to the academy, or museum, where
they were transcribed by persons employed for that purpose. The
transcripts were then delivered to the proprietors, and the originals
laid up in the library. Ptolemy Euergetes, for instance, borrowed of the
Athenians the works of Sophocles, Euripides, and Æschylus, and only
returned them the copies, which he caused to be transcribed in as
beautiful a manner as possible; the originals he retained for his own
library, presenting the Athenians with fifteen talents for the exchange,
that is, with three thousand pounds sterling and upwards. As the museum
was at first in the quarter of the city called Bruchion, the library was
placed there; but when the number of books amounted to four hundred
thousand volumes, another library, within the Serapeum, was erected by
way of supplement to it, and, on that account, called the daughter of
the former. The books lodged in this increased to the number of three
hundred thousand volumes; and these two made up the number of seven
hundred thousand volumes, of which the royal libraries of the Ptolemies
were said to consist. In the war which Julius Cæsar waged with the
inhabitants of Alexandria, the library of Bruchion was accidentally, but
unfortunately, burnt. But the library in Serapeum still remained, and
there Cleopatra deposited the two hundred thousand volumes of the
Pergamean library with which she was presented by Marc Antony. These,
and others added to them from time to time, rendered the new library
more numerous and considerable than the former; and though it was
plundered more than once during the revolutions which happened in the
Roman empire, yet it was as frequently supplied with the same number of
books, and continued, for many ages, to be of great fame and use, till
it was burnt by the Saracens, A. D. 642. Abulpharagius, in his history
of the tenth dynasty, gives the following account of this catastrophe:
John Philoponus, surnamed the Grammarian, a famous Peripatetic
philosopher, being at Alexandria when the city was taken by the
Saracens, was admitted to familiar intercourse with Amrou, the Arabian
general, and presumed to solicit a gift, inestimable in his opinion, but
contemptible in that of the barbarians; and this was the royal library.
Amrou was inclined to gratify his wish, but his rigid integrity scrupled
to alienate the least object without the consent of the caliph. He
accordingly wrote to Omar, whose well known answer was dictated by the
ignorance of a fanatic: “If these writings of the Greeks agree with the
Koran, or book of God, they are useless, and need not be preserved; if
they disagree, they are pernicious, and ought to be destroyed.” The
sentence of destruction was executed with blind obedience: the volumes
of paper or parchment were distributed to the four thousand baths of the
city; and such was their number, that six months were barely sufficient
for the consumption of this precious fuel.

ALGUM, אלגם or אלגומים, 1 Kings x, 11, 12. This is the name of a kind of
wood, or tree, large quantities of which were brought by the fleet of
Solomon from Ophir, of which he made pillars for the house of the Lord,
and for his own palace; also musical instruments. See ALMUG.

ALLEGORY, a figure in rhetoric, whereby we make use of terms which, in
their proper signification, mean something else than what they are
brought to denote; or it is a figure whereby we say one thing, expecting
it shall be understood of another, to which it alludes; or which, under
the literal sense of the words, conceals a foreign or distant meaning.
An allegory is, properly, a continued metaphor, or a series of several
metaphors in one or more sentences. Such is that beautiful allegory in
Horace, lib. i, Od. 14.

                  “_O navis, referent in mare te novi
                  Fluctus_,” _&c._

[O ship, shall new billows drive thee again to sea, &c.]

Where the ship is usually held to stand for the republic; waves, for
civil war; port, for peace and concord; oars, for soldiers; and mariners
for magistrates. Thus, also, in Prior’s Henry and Emma, Emma describes
her constancy to Henry in the following allegorical manner:--

            “Did I but purpose to embark with thee
            On the smooth surface of a summer’s sea,
            While gentle zephyrs play with prosperous gales,
            And fortune’s favour fills the swelling sails;
            But would forsake the ship, and make the shore,
            When the winds whistle, and the tempests roar?”

Cicero, likewise, speaking of himself, in Pison. c. 9, tom. vi, p. 187,
uses this allegorical language: “Nor was I so timorous, that, after I
had steered the ship of the state through the greatest storms and waves,
and brought her safe into port, I should fear the cloud of your
forehead, or your colleague’s pestilential breath. I saw other winds, I
perceived other storms, I did not withdraw from other impending
tempests; but I exposed myself singly to them for the common safety.”
Here the state is compared to a ship, and all the things said of it
under that image, are expressed in metaphors made use of to denote the
dangers with which it had been threatened. We have also a very fine
example of an allegory in Psalm lxxx; in which the people of Israel are
represented under the image of a vine, and the figure is supported
throughout with great correctness and beauty. Whereas, if, instead of
describing the vine as wasted by the boar from the wood, and devoured by
the wild beasts of the field, the Psalmist had said, it was afflicted by
Heathens, or overcome by enemies, which is the real meaning, the
figurative and the literal meaning would have been blended, and the
allegory ruined. The learned Bishop Lowth, _De Sacrâ Poesi Hebræorum,
Præl._ 10, 11, has specified three forms of allegory that occur in
sacred poetry. The first is that which rhetoricians call a continued
metaphor. When several metaphors succeed each other, they alter the form
of the composition; and this succession has very properly, in reference
to the etymology of the word, been denominated by the Greeks αλληγορια,
an allegory; although Aristotle, instead of considering it as a new
species of figure, has referred it to the class of metaphors. The
principle of allegory in this sense of the term, and of the simple
metaphor, is the same; nor is it an easy matter to restrict each to its
proper limit, and to mark the precise termination of the one, and the
commencement of the other. This eminently judicious critic observes,
that when the Hebrew poets use the congenial figures of metaphor,
allegory, and comparison, particularly in the prophetic poetry, they
adopt a peculiar mode of doing it, and seldom regulate the imagery which
they introduce by any fixed principle or standard. Not satisfied with a
simple metaphor, they often run it into an allegory, or blend with it a
direct comparison. The allegory sometimes follows, and sometimes
precedes the simile: to this is added a frequent change of imagery, as
well as of persons and tenses; and thus are displayed an energy and
boldness, both of expression and meaning, which are unconfined by any
stated rules, and which mark the discriminating genius of the Hebrew
poetry. Thus, in Gen. xlix, 9, “Judah is a lion’s whelp;” this metaphor
is immediately drawn out into an allegory, with a change of person:
“From the prey, my son, thou art gone up,” that is, to the mountains,
which is understood; and in the succeeding sentences the person is again
changed, the image is gradually advanced, and the metaphor is joined
with a comparison that is repeated.

               “He stoopeth down, he coucheth as a lion;
               And as a lioness; who shall rouse him?”

A similar instance occurs in the prophecy, recorded in Psalm cx, 3,
which explicitly foretels the abundant increase of the Gospel on its
first promulgation. This kind of allegory, however, sometimes assumes a
more regular and perfect form, and then occupies the whole subject and
compass of the discourse. An example of this kind occurs in Solomon’s
well known allegory, Eccles. xii, 2–6, in which old age is so admirably
depicted. There is also, in Isaiah xxviii, 24–29, an allegory, which,
with no less elegance of imagery, is more simple and regular, as well as
more just and complete, both in the form and the method of treating it.
Another kind of allegory is that which, in the proper and more
restricted sense, may be called a parable; and consists of a continued
narration of some fictitious event, accommodated, by way of similitude,
to the illustration of some important truth. The Greeks call these
allegories αινοι or apologues, and the Latins _fabulæ_, or fables. (See
_Parable_.) The third species of allegory, which often occurs in the
prophetic poetry, is that in which a double meaning is couched under the
same words, or when the same discourse, differently interpreted,
designates different events, dissimilar in their nature, and remote as
to time. These different relations are denominated the literal and
mystical senses. This kind of allegory, which the learned prelate calls
mystical, seems to derive its origin from the principles of the Jewish
religion; and it differs from the two former species in a variety of
respects. In these allegories the writer may adopt any imagery that is
most suitable to his fancy or inclination; but the only proper materials
for this allegory must be supplied from the sacred rites of the Hebrews
themselves; and it can only be introduced in relation to such things as
are immediately connected with the Jewish religion, or their immediate
opposites. The former kinds partake of the common privileges of poetry;
but the mystical allegory has its foundation in the nature of the Jewish
economy, and is adapted solely to the poetry of the Hebrews. Besides, in
the other forms of allegory, the exterior or ostensible imagery is mere
fiction, and the truth lies altogether in the interior or remote sense;
but in this allegory each idea is equally agreeable to truth. The
exterior or ostensible image is itself a reality; and although it
sustains another character, it does not wholly lay aside its own. There
is also a great variety in the use and conduct of the mystical allegory;
in the modes in which the corresponding images are arranged, and in
which they are obscured or eclipsed by one another. Sometimes the
obvious or literal sense is so prominent and conspicuous, both in the
words and sentiments, that the remote or figurative sense is scarcely
permitted to glimmer through it. On the other hand, the figurative sense
is more frequently found to beam forth with so much perspicuity and
lustre, that the literal sense is quite cast into the shade, or becomes
indiscernible. Sometimes the principal or figurative idea is exhibited
to the attentive eye with a constant and equal light; and sometimes it
unexpectedly glares upon us, and breaks forth with sudden and
astonishing coruscations, like a flash of lightning bursting from the
clouds. But the mode or form of this figure which possesses the chief
beauty and elegance, is, when the two images, equally conspicuous, run,
as it were, parallel throughout the whole poem, mutually illustrating
and correspondent to each other. The learned author has illustrated
these observations by instances selected from Psalms ii, and lxxii. He
adds, that the mystical allegory is, on account of the obscurity
resulting from the nature of the figure, and the style of the
composition, so agreeable to the nature of the prophecy, that it is the
form which it generally, and indeed lawfully, assumes, as best adapted
to the prediction of future events. It describes events in a manner
exactly conformable to the intention of prophecy; that is, in a dark,
disguised, and intricate manner, sketching out, in a general way, their
form and outline; and seldom descending to a minuteness of description
and exactness of detail.

ALLELUIA, or HALLELU-JAH, הללו־יה, _praise the Lord_; or, _praise to the
Lord_: compounded of הללו, _praise ye_, and יה, _the Lord_. This word
occurs at the beginning, or at the end, of many Psalms. Alleluia was
sung on solemn days of rejoicing: “And all her streets shall sing
Alleluia,” says Tobit, speaking of the rebuilding of Jerusalem, Tob.
xiii, 18. St. John, in the Revelation, xix, 1, 3, 4, 6, says, “I heard a
great voice of much people in heaven, who cried, Alleluia; and the four
living creatures fell down, and worshipped God, saying, Alleluia.” This
expression of joy and praise was transferred from the synagogue to the
church. At the funeral of Fabiola, “several psalms were sung with loud
alleluias,” says Jerom, in _Epitaphio Paulæ_, “The monks of Palestine
were awaked at their midnight watchings, with the singing of alleluias.”
It is still occasionally used in devotional psalmody.

ALMAH, עלמה, a Hebrew word signifying properly _a virgin_, a young woman
unacquainted with man. In this sense it occurs in the famous passage of
Isaiah, vii, 14: “Behold a virgin shall conceive and bear a son.” The
Hebrew has no term that more properly signifies a virgin than _almah_.
St. Jerom, in his commentary on this passage, observes, that the Prophet
declined using the word _bethaul_ which signifies any young woman, or
young person, but employed the term _almah_, which denotes a virgin
never seen by man. This is the import of the word _almah_, which is
derived from a root which signifies _to conceal_. It is very well known,
that young women in the east do not appear in public, but are shut up in
their houses, and their mothers’ apartments, like nuns. The Chaldee
paraphrast and the Septuagint translate _almah_ “a virgin;” and Akiba,
the famous rabbin, who was a great enemy to Christ and Christians, and
lived in the second century, understands it in the same manner. The
Apostles and Evangelists, and the Jews of our Saviour’s time, explained
it in the same sense, and expected a Messiah born of a virgin.

The Jews, that they may obscure this plain text, and weaken this proof
of the truth of the Christian religion, pretend that the Hebrew word
signifies a young woman, and not a virgin. But this corrupt translation
is easily confuted. 1. Because this word constantly denotes a virgin in
all other passages of Scripture in which it is used. 2. From the intent
of the passage, which was to confirm their faith by a strange and
wonderful sign. It surely could be no wonder, that a young woman should
conceive a child; but it was a very extraordinary circumstance that a
virgin should conceive and bear a son.

ALMIGHTY, an attribute of the Deity, Gen. xvii, 1. The Hebrew name, שדי,
_Shaddai_, signifies also _all-sufficient_, or _all-bountiful_. See Gen.
xxviii, 3; xxxv, 11; xliii, 14; xlix, 25. Of the omnipotence of God, we
have a most ample revelation in the Scriptures, expressed in the most
sublime language. From the annunciation by Moses of a divine existence
who was “in the beginning,” before all things, the very first step is to
the display of his almighty power in the creation out of nothing, and
the immediate arrangement in order and perfection, of the “_heaven and
the earth_;” by which is meant, not this globe only with its atmosphere,
or even with its own celestial system, but the universe itself; for “_he
made the stars also_.” We are thus at once placed in the presence of an
agent of unbounded power; for we must all feel that a being which could
create such a world as this, must, beyond all comparison, possess a
power greater than any which we experience in ourselves, than any which
we observe in other visible agents, and to which we are not authorized
by our observation or knowledge to assign any limits of space or
duration.

2. That the sacred writers should so frequently dwell upon the
omnipotence of God, has important reasons which arise out of the very
design of the revelation which they were the means of communicating to
mankind. Men were to be reminded of their obligations to obedience; and
God is therefore constantly exhibited as the Creator, the Preserver, and
Lord of all things. His solemn worship and fear were to be enjoined upon
them; and, by the manifestation of his works, the veil was withdrawn
from his glory and majesty. Idolatry was to be checked and reproved, and
the true God was therefore placed in contrast with the limited and
powerless gods of the Heathen: “Among the gods of the nations, is there
no god like unto thee; neither are there any works like thy works.”
Finally, he is exhibited as the object of _trust_ to creatures
constantly reminded by experience of their own infirmity and dependence;
and to them it is essential to know, that his power is absolute,
unlimited, and irresistible, and that, in a word, he is “mighty to
save.”

3. In a revelation which was thus designed to awe and control the
wicked, and to afford strength of mind and consolation to good men under
all circumstances, the omnipotence of God is therefore placed in a great
variety of impressive views, and connected with the most striking
illustrations.

It is declared by the fact of _creation_, the creation of beings out of
_nothing_; which itself, though it had been confined to a single object,
however minute, exceeds finite comprehension, and overwhelms the
faculties. This with God required no effort: “He spake and it was done,
he commanded and it stood fast.” The _vastness_ and _variety_ of his
works enlarge the conception: “The heavens declare the glory of God, and
the firmament showeth his handy work.” “He spreadeth out the heavens,
and treadeth upon the waves of the sea; he maketh Arcturus, Orion, and
Pleiades, and the chambers of the south; he doeth great things, past
finding out, yea, and wonders without number. He stretcheth out the
north over the empty place, and hangeth the earth upon nothing. He
bindeth up the waters in the thick clouds, and the cloud is not rent
under them; he hath compassed the waters with bounds until the day and
night come to an end.” The _ease_ with which he sustains, orders, and
controls the most powerful and unruly of the elements, arrays his
omnipotence with an aspect of ineffable dignity and majesty: “By him all
things consist.” “He brake up for the sea a decreed place, and set bars
and doors, and said, Hitherto shalt thou come and no farther, and here
shall thy proud waves be stayed.” “He looketh to the end of the earth,
and seeth under the whole heaven, to make the weight for the winds, to
weigh the waters by measure, to make a decree for the rain, and a way
for the lightning of the thunder.” “Who hath measured the waters in the
hollow of his hand, meted out heaven with a span, comprehended the dust
of the earth in a measure, and weighed the mountains in scales, and the
hills in a balance.” The descriptions of the divine power are often
_terrible_: “The pillars of heaven tremble, and are astonished at his
reproof; he divideth the sea by his power.” “He removeth the mountains,
and they know it not; he overturneth them in his anger; he shaketh the
earth out of her place, and the pillars thereof tremble; he commandeth
the sun and it riseth not, and sealeth up the stars.” The same absolute
subjection of creatures to his dominion is seen among the intelligent
inhabitants of the material universe; and angels, mortals the most
exalted, and evil spirits, are swayed with as much ease as the most
passive elements: “He maketh his angels spirits, and his ministers a
flame of fire.” They veil their faces before his throne, and acknowledge
themselves his servants: “It is he that sitteth upon the circle of the
earth, and the inhabitants thereof are as grasshoppers,” “as the dust of
the balance, less than nothing and vanity.” “He bringeth princes to
nothing.” “He setteth up one and putteth down another;” “for the kingdom
is the Lord’s, and he is governor among the nations.” “The angels that
sinned he cast down to hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness,
to be reserved unto judgment.” The closing scenes of this world complete
these transcendent conceptions of the majesty and power of God. The dead
of all ages rise from their graves at his _voice_: and the sea gives up
the dead which are in it. Before his _face_ heaven and earth fly away;
the stars fall from heaven, and the powers of heaven are shaken. The
dead, small and great, stand before God, and are divided as a shepherd
divideth the sheep from the goats. The wicked go away into everlasting
punishment, but the righteous into life eternal.

4. Of these amazing views of the omnipotence of God, spread almost
through every page of the Scriptures, the power lies in their _truth_.
They are not eastern exaggerations, mistaken for sublimity. Every thing
in nature answers to them, and renews from age to age the energy of the
impression which they cannot but make on the reflecting mind. The order
of the astral revolutions indicates the constant presence of an
invisible but incomprehensible power. The seas hurl the weight of their
billows upon the rising shores, but every where find a “_bound_ fixed by
a perpetual decree.” The tides reach their height; if they flowed on for
a few hours, the earth would change places with the bed of the sea; but,
under an invisible control, they become refluent. The expression, “He
toucheth the mountains and they smoke,” is not mere imagery:--every
volcano is a testimony of its truth; and earthquakes proclaim, that,
before him, “the pillars of the world tremble.” Men collected into
armies, or populous nations, give us vast ideas of human power; but let
an army be placed amidst the sand storms and burning winds of the
desert, as, in the east; or, before “_his frost_,” as in our own day in
Russia, where one of the mightiest armaments was seen retreating before,
or perishing under, an unexpected visitation of snow and storm; or let
the utterly helpless state of a populous country which has been visited
by famine, or by a resistless pestilential disease, be reflected upon;
and we feel that it is scarcely a figure of speech to say, that “all
nations before him are _less than nothing_ and _vanity_.”

5. Nor, in reviewing this doctrine of Scripture, ought the great
practical uses made of the omnipotence of God, by the sacred writers, to
be overlooked. By them nothing is said for the mere display of
knowledge, as in Heathen writers; and we have no speculations without a
subservient _moral_. To excite and keep alive in man the fear and
worship of God, and to bring him to a felicitous confidence in that
almighty power which pervades and controls all things, are the noble
ends of those ample displays of the omnipotence of God, which roll
through the sacred volume with a sublimity that inspiration only could
supply. “Declare his glory among the Heathen, his marvellous works among
all nations; for great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised.--Glory
and honour are in his presence, and strength and gladness in his
place.--Give unto the Lord, ye kindreds of the people, give unto the
Lord glory and strength; give unto the Lord the glory due unto his
name.--The Lord is my light and my salvation; whom shall I fear?--The
Lord is the strength of my life; of whom shall I be afraid? If God be
for us, who _then_ can be against us? Our help standeth in the name of
the Lord, who made heaven and earth.--What time I am afraid, I will
trust in thee.”--Thus, as one observes, “our natural fears, of which we
must have many, remit us to God, and remind us, since we know what God
is, to lay hold on his almighty power.”

6. Ample, however, as are these views of the power of God, the subject
is not exhausted. As, when the Scriptures speak of the eternity of God,
they declare it so as to give us a mere glimpse of that fearful
peculiarity of the divine nature, that God is the fountain of being to
himself, and that he is eternal, because he is the “I AM;” so we are
taught not to measure God’s omnipotence by the actual displays of it
which we see around us. These are the _manifestations_ of the fact, but
not the _measure_ of the attribute; and should we resort to the
discoveries of modern philosophy, which, by the help of instruments, has
so greatly enlarged the known boundaries of the visible universe, and
add to the stars which are visible to the naked eye, those new
exhibitions of the divine power in the nebulous appearances of the
heavens which are resolvable into myriads of distinct celestial
luminaries, whose immense distances commingle their light before it
reaches our eyes; we thus almost infinitely expand the circle of created
existence, and enter upon a formerly unknown and overwhelming range of
divine operation. But still we are only reminded, that his power is
truly _almighty_ and _measureless_--“Lo, all these are parts of his
ways; but how little a portion is known of him, and the thunder of his
power who can understand?” It is a mighty conception that we form of a
power from which all other power is derived, and to which it is
subordinate; which nothing can oppose; which can beat down and
annihilate all other power whatever; which operates in the most perfect
manner, at once, in an instant, with the utmost ease; but the Scriptures
lead us to the contemplation of greater and even unfathomable depths.
The omnipotence of God is inconceivable and boundless. It arises from
the infinite perfection of God, that his power can never be actually
exhausted; and, in every imaginable instant in eternity, that
inexhaustible power of God can, if it please him, be adding either more
creatures to those in existence, or greater perfection to them; since
“it belongs to self-existent being, to be always full and communicative,
and, to the communicated contingent being, to be ever empty and
craving.”

7. One limitation of the divine power it is true we can conceive, but it
detracts nothing from its perfection. Where things in themselves imply a
contradiction, as that a body may be extended and not extended, in a
certain place and not in it, at the same time; such things cannot be
done by God, because contradictions are impossible in their own nature.
Nor is it any derogation from the divine power to say, they cannot be
done; for as the object of the understanding, of the eye, and the ear,
is that which is intelligible, visible, and audible; so the object of
power must be that which is possible; and as it is no prejudice to the
most perfect understanding, or sight, or hearing, that it does not
understand what is not intelligible, or see what is not visible, or hear
what is not audible; so neither is it any diminution to the most perfect
power, that it does not do what is not possible. In like manner, God
cannot do any thing that is repugnant to his other perfections: he
cannot lie, nor deceive, nor deny himself; for this would be injurious
to his truth. He cannot love sin, nor punish innocence; for this would
destroy his holiness and goodness: and therefore to ascribe a power to
him that is inconsistent with the rectitude of his nature, is not to
magnify but debase him; for all unrighteousness is weakness, a defection
from right reason, a deviation from the perfect rule of action, and
arises from a want of goodness and power. In a word, since all the
attributes of God are essentially the same, a power in him which tends
to destroy any other attribute of the divine nature, must be a power
destructive of itself. Well, therefore, may we conclude him absolutely
omnipotent, who, by being able to effect all things consistent with his
perfections, showeth infinite ability, and, by not being able to do any
thing repugnant to the same perfections, demonstrates himself subject to
no infirmity.

8. Nothing certainly in the finest writings of antiquity, were all their
best thoughts collected as to the majesty and power of God, can bear any
comparison with the views thus presented to us by divine revelation.
Were we to forget, for a moment, what is the fact, that their noblest
notions stand connected with fancies and vain speculations which deprive
them of their force, still their thoughts never rise so high; the
current is broken, the round of lofty conception is not completed, and,
unconnected as their views of divine power were with the eternal destiny
of man, and the very reason of creation, we never hear in them, as in
the Scriptures, “the THUNDER of his power.”

ALMOND TREE, לוז. Arabic, _lauz_. Translated _hazel_, Gen. xxx, 37; שקד,
rendered _almond_, Gen. xliii, 11; Exod. xxv, 33, 34; xxxvii, 19, 20;
Num. xvii, 8; Eccles. xii, 5; and Jer. i, 11. The first name may be that
of the _tree_; the other, that of the _fruit_, or _nut_.

A tree resembling the peach tree in its leaves and blossoms, but the
fruit is longer and more compressed, the outer green coat is thinner and
drier when ripe, and the shell of the stone is not so rugged. This
stone, or nut, contains a kernel, which is the only esculent part. The
whole arrives at maturity in September, when the outer tough cover
splits open and discharges the nut. From the circumstance of its
blossoming the earliest of any of the trees, beginning as soon as the
rigour of winter is past, and before it is in leaf, it has its Hebrew
name _shakad_, which comes from a verb signifying _to make haste_, _to
be in a hurry_, or _to awake early_. To the forwardness of the almond
tree there seems to be a reference in Jeremiah: “The word of the Lord
came unto me, saying, Jeremiah, what seest thou? And I said, I see a rod
of an almond tree. Then said the Lord unto me, Thou hast well seen: for
I will hasten my word to perform it;” or rather, “I am hastening, or
watching over my word to fulfil it,” Jer. i, 11, 12. In this manner it
is rendered by the Seventy; and by the Vulgate, _Vigilabo ego super
verbum meum_. [I will watch over my word.] This is the first vision with
which the Prophet was honoured; and his attention is roused by a very
significant emblem of that severe correction with which the Most High
was hastening to visit his people for their iniquity; and from the
species of tree to which the rod belonged, he is warned of its near
approach. The idea which the appearance of the almond rod suggested to
his mind, is confirmed by the exposition of God himself: “I am watching
over, or on account of, my word to fulfil it;” and this double mode of
instruction, first by emblem, and then by exposition, was certainly
intended to make a deeper impression on the mind both of Jeremiah and of
the people to whom he was sent.

It is probable that the rods which the princes of Israel bore, were
scions of the almond tree, at once the ensign of their office, and the
emblem of their vigilance. Such, we know from the testimony of
Scripture, was the rod of Aaron; which renders it exceedingly probable,
that the rods of the other chiefs were from the same tree.

The hoary head is beautifully compared by Solomon to the almond tree,
covered in the earliest days of spring with its snow white flowers,
before a single leaf has budded: “The almond tree shall flourish, and
the grasshopper shall be a burden, and desire shall fail,” Eccl. xii, 5.
Man has existed in this world but a few days, when old age begins to
appear, sheds its snows upon his head, prematurely nips his hopes,
darkens his earthly prospects, and hurries him into the grave.

ALMUG TREE, a certain kind of wood, mentioned 1 Kings, x, 11; 2 Chron.
ii, 8; ix, 10, 11. Jerom and the Vulgate render it, _ligna thyina_, and
the Septuagint ξύλα ϖελεκητὰ, _wrought wood_. Several critics understand
it to mean _gummy wood_; but a wood abounding in resin must be very
unfit for the uses to which this is said to be applied. Celsus queries
if it be not the sandal; but Michaelis thinks the particular species of
wood to be wholly unknown to us. Dr. Shaw supposes that the almug tree
was the cypress; and he observes that the wood of this tree is still
used in Italy and other places for violins, harpsichords, and other
stringed instruments.

ALOE, עלר, a plant with broad leaves, nearly two inches thick, prickly
and serrated. It grows about two feet high. A very bitter gum is
extracted from it, used for medicinal purposes, and anciently for
embalming dead bodies. Nicodemus is said, John xix, 39, to have brought
one hundred pounds’ weight of myrrh and aloes to embalm the body of
Jesus. The quantity has been exclaimed against by certain Jews, as being
enough for fifty bodies. But instead of ἑκατὸν it might originally have
been written δέκατον, _ten_ pounds’ weight. However, at the funeral of
Herod there were five hundred ἀρωματόφορους, _spice bearers_; and at
that of R. Gamaliel, eighty pounds of opobalsamum were used.

The wood which God showed Moses, that with it he might sweeten the
waters of Marah, is called _alvah_, Exod. xv, 25. The word has some
relation to aloe; and some interpreters are of opinion that Moses used a
bitter sort of wood, that so the power of God might be the more
remarkable. Mr. Bruce mentions a town, or large village, by the name of
Elvah. It is thickly planted with trees; is the _oasis parva_ of the
ancients; and the last inhabited place to the west that is under the
jurisdiction of Egypt. He also observes that the Arabs call a shrub or
tree, not unlike our hawthorn, either in wood or flower, by the name of
elvah. “It was this,” say they, “with which Moses sweetened the waters
of Marah; and with this, too, did Kalib Ibn el Walid sweeten those of
Elvah, once bitter, and give the place the name of this circumstance.”
It may be that God directed Moses to the very wood proper for the
purpose. M. Neibuhr, when in these parts, inquired after wood capable of
this effect, but could gain no information of any such. It will not,
however, from hence follow that Moses really used a bitter wood; but, as
Providence usually works by the proper and fit means to accomplish its
ends, it seems likely that the wood he made use of was, in some degree
at least, corrective of that quality which abounded in the water, and so
rendered it potable. This seems to have been the opinion of the author
of Ecclesiasticus, xxxviii, 5. That other water, also, requires some
correction, and that such a correction is applied to it, appears from
the custom in Egypt in respect to that of the Nile, which, though
somewhat muddy, is rendered pure and salutary by being put into jars,
the inside of which is rubbed with a paste made of bitter almonds. The
first discoverers of the Floridas are said to have corrected the
stagnant and fetid water they found there, by infusing in it branches of
sassafras; and it is understood that the first inducement of the Chinese
to the general use of tea, was to correct the water of their ponds and
rivers.

The LIGN-ALOE, or agallochum, Num. xxiv, 6; Psalm xlv, 9; and Cantic.
iv, 14. אהלת, masculine, אהל, whose plural is אהלים, is a small tree
about eight or ten feet high. That the flower of this plant yielded a
fragrance, is assured to us in the following extract from Swinburne’s
Travels, letter xii: “This morning, like many of the foregoing ones, was
delicious. The sun rose gloriously out of the sea, and all the air
around was perfumed with the effluvia of the aloe, as its rays sucked up
the dew from the leaves.” This extremely bitter plant contains under the
bark three sorts of wood. The first is black, solid, and weighty; the
second is of a tawny colour, of a light spongy texture, very porous, and
filled with a resin extremely fragrant and agreeable; the third kind of
wood, which is the heart, has a strong aromatic odour, and is esteemed
in the east more precious than gold itself. It is used for perfuming
habits and apartments, and is administered as a cordial in fainting and
epileptic fits. These pieces, called calunbac, are carefully preserved
in pewter boxes, to prevent their drying. When they are used they are
ground upon a marble with such liquids as are best suited to the purpose
for which they are intended. This wood, mentioned Cantic. iv, 14, in
conjunction with several other odoriferous plants there referred to, was
in high esteem among the Hebrews for its exquisite exhalations.

            The scented aloe, and each shrub that showers
            Gum from its veins, and odours from its flowers.

Thus the son of Sirach, Ecclesiasticus xxiv, 15: “I gave a sweet smell
like the cinnamon and aspalathus. I yielded a pleasant odour like the
best myrrh; like galbanum and onyx, and fragrant storax, and like the
fume of frankincense in the tabernacle.” It may not be amiss to observe
that the Persian translator renders _ahalim_, sandal wood; and the same
was the opinion of a certain Jew in Arabia who was consulted by Neibuhr.

ALPHA, the first letter of the Greek alphabet; Omega being the last
letter. Hence Alpha and Omega is a title which Christ appropriates to
himself, Rev. i, 8; xxi, 6; xxii, 13; as signifying the beginning and
the end, the first and the last, and thus properly denoting his
perfection and eternity.

ALPHEUS, father of James the less, Matt. x, 3; Luke vi, 15. Alpheus was
the husband of Mary, believed to have been sister to the mother of
Christ; for which reason, James is called the Lord’s brother; but the
term brother is too general in its application to fix their relation,
though the fact is probable. Many are of opinion that Cleopas, mentioned
Luke xxiv, 18, is the same as Alpheus; Alpheus being his Greek name, and
Cleopas his Hebrew, or Syriac name, according to the custom of this
province, (or of the time,) where men often had two names; by one of
which they were known to their friends and countrymen, by the other to
the Romans or strangers.

2. ALPHEUS, father of Levi, or Matthew, whom Jesus took to be an Apostle
and Evangelist, Mark ii, 14.

ALTAR. Sacrifices are nearly as ancient as worship, and altars are of
almost equal antiquity. Scripture speaks of altars, erected by the
patriarchs, without describing their form, or the materials of which
they were composed. The altar which Jacob set up at Bethel, was the
stone which had served him for a pillow; Gideon sacrificed on the rock
before his house. The first altars which God commanded Moses to raise,
were of earth or rough stones; and it was declared that if iron were
used in constructing them they would become impure, Exod. xx, 24, 25.
The altar which Moses enjoined Joshua to build on Mount Ebal, was to be
of unpolished stones, Deut. xxvii, 5; Josh. viii, 31; and it is very
probable that such were those built by Samuel, Saul, and David. The
altar which Solomon erected in the temple was of brass, but filled, it
is believed, with rough stones, 2 Chron. iv, 1–3. It was twenty cubits
long, twenty wide, and ten high. That built at Jerusalem, by Zerubbabel,
after the return from Babylon, was of rough stones; as was that of
Maccabees. Josephus says that the altar which in his time was in the
temple was of rough stones, fifteen cubits high, forty long, and forty
wide.

Among the Romans altars were of two kinds, the higher and the lower; the
higher were intended for the celestial gods, and were called _altaria_,
from _altus_; the lower were for the terrestrial and infernal gods, and
were called _aræ_. Those dedicated to the heavenly gods were raised a
great height above the surface of the earth; those of the terrestrial
gods were almost even with the surface; and those for the infernal
deities were only holes dug in the ground called _scrobiculi_.

Before temples were in use the altars were placed in the groves,
highways, or on tops of mountains, inscribed with the names, ensigns, or
characters of the respective gods to whom they belonged. The great
temples at Rome generally contained three altars; the first in the
sanctuary, at the foot of the statue, for incense and libations; the
second before the gate of the temple, for the sacrifices of victims; and
the third was a portable one for the offerings and sacred vestments or
vessels to lie upon. The ancients used to swear upon the altars upon
solemn occasions, such as confirming alliances, treaties of peace, &c.
They were also places of refuge, and served as an asylum and sanctuary
to all who fled to them, whatever their crimes were.

The principal altars among the Jews were those of incense, of
burnt-offering, and the altar or table for the shew bread. The altar of
incense was a small table of shittim wood covered with plates of gold.
It was a cubit long, a cubit broad, and two cubits high. At the four
corners were four horns. The priest, whose turn it was to officiate,
burnt incense on this altar, at the time of the morning sacrifice
between the sprinkling of the blood and the laying of the pieces of the
victim on the altar of burnt-offering. He did the same also in the
evening, between the laying of the pieces on the altar and the
drink-offering. At the same time the people prayed in silence, and their
prayers were offered up by the priests. The altar of burnt-offering was
of shittim wood also, and carried upon the shoulders of the priests, by
staves of the same wood overlaid with brass. In Moses’s days it was five
cubits square, and three high: but it was greatly enlarged in the days
of Solomon, being twenty cubits square, and ten in height. It was
covered with brass, and had a horn at each corner to which the sacrifice
was tied. This altar was placed in the open air, that the smoke might
not sully the inside of the tabernacle or temple. On this altar the holy
fire was renewed from time to time, and kept constantly burning. Hereon,
likewise, the sacrifices of lambs and bullocks were burnt, especially a
lamb every morning at the third hour, or nine of the clock, and a lamb
every afternoon at three, Exod. xx, 24, 25; xxvii, 1, 2, 4; xxxviii, 1.
The altar of burnt-offering had the privilege of being a sanctuary or
place of refuge. The wilful murderer, indeed, sought protection there in
vain; for by the express command of God he might be dragged to justice,
even from the altar. The altar or table of shew bread was of shittim
wood also, covered with plates of gold, and had a border round it
adorned with sculpture. It was two cubits long, one wide, and one and a
half in height. This table stood in the _sanctum sanctorum_, [holy of
holies,] and upon it were placed the loaves of shew bread. After the
return of the Jews from their captivity, and the building of the second
temple, the form and size of the altars were somewhat changed.

Sacrifices according to the laws of Moses, could not be offered except
by the priests; and at any other place than on the altar of the
tabernacle or the temple. Furthermore, they were not to be offered to
idols, nor with any superstitious rites. See Lev. xvii, 1–7; Deut. xii,
15, 16. Without these precautionary measures, the true religion would
hardly have been secure. If a different arrangement had been adopted, if
the priests had been scattered about to various altars, without being
subjected to the salutary restraint which would result from a mutual
observation of each other, they would no doubt some of them have
willingly consented to the worship of idols; and others, in their
separate situation, would not have been in a condition to resist the
wishes of the multitude, had those wishes been wrong. The necessity of
sacrificing at one altar, (that of the tabernacle or temple,) is
frequently and emphatically insisted on, Deut. xii, 13, 14; and all
other altars are disapproved, Lev. xxvi, 30, compare Joshua xxii, 9–34.
Notwithstanding this, it appears that, subsequently to the time of
Moses, especially in the days of the kings, altars were multiplied; but
they fell under suspicions, although some of them were perhaps sacred to
the worship of the true God. It is, nevertheless, true, that prophets,
whose characters were above all suspicion, sacrificed, in some
instances, in other places than the one designated by the laws, 1 Sam.
xiii, 3–14; xvi, 1–5; 1 Kings xviii, 21–40.

AMALEKITES, a people whose country adjoined the southern border of the
land of Canaan, in the north-western part of Arabia Petræa. They are
generally supposed to have been the descendants of Amalek, the son of
Eliphaz, and grandson of Esau. But Moses speaks of the Amalekites long
before this Amalek was born; namely in the days of Abraham, when
Chedorlaomer, king of Elam, devastated their country, Gen. xiv, 7; from
which it may be inferred that there was some other and more ancient
Amalek, from whom this people sprang. The Arabians have a tradition that
this Amalek was a son of Ham; and when we consider that so early as the
march from Egypt the Amalekites were a people powerful enough to attack
the Israelites, it is far more probable that they should derive their
ancestry from Ham, than from the then recent stock of the grandson of
Esau. It may also be said, that the character and fate of this people
were more consonant with the dealings of Providence toward the families
of the former. This more early origin of the Amalekites will likewise
explain why Balaam called them the “first of the nations.”

They are supposed by some to have been a party or tribe of the shepherds
who invaded Egypt, and kept it in subjection for two hundred years. This
will agree with the Arabian tradition as to their descent. It also
agrees with their pastoral and martial habits, as well as with their
geographical position; which was perhaps made choice of on their
retiring from Egypt, adjoining that of their countrymen the Philistines,
whose history is very similar. It also furnishes a motive for their
hostility to the Jews, and their treacherous attempt to destroy them in
the desert. The ground of this hostility has been very generally
supposed to have been founded in the remembrance of Jacob’s depriving
their progenitor of his birthright. But we do not find that the
Edomites, who had this ground for a hatred to the Jews, made any attempt
to molest them, nor that Moses ever reproaches the Amalekites for
attacking the Israelites as their brethren; nor do we ever find in
Scripture that the Amalekites joined with the Edomites, but always with
the Canaanites and the Philistines. These considerations would be
sufficient, had we no other reasons for believing them not to be of the
stock of Esau. They may, however, be deduced from a higher origin; and
viewing them as Cuthite shepherds and warriors, we have an adequate
explanation both of their imperious and warlike character, and of the
motive of their hostility to the Jews in particular. If expelled with
the rest of their race from Egypt, they could not but recollect the
fatal overthrow at the Red Sea; and if not participators in that
catastrophe, still, as members of the same family, they must bear this
event in remembrance with bitter feelings of revenge. But an additional
motive is not wanting for this hostility, especially for its first act.
The Amalekites probably knew that the Israelites were advancing to take
possession of the land of Canaan, and resolved to frustrate the purposes
of God in this respect. Hence they did not wait for their near approach
to that country, but came down from their settlements, on its southern
borders, to attack them unawares at Rephidim. Be this as it may, the
Amalekites came on the Israelites, when encamped at that place, little
expecting such an assault. Moses commanded Joshua, with a chosen band,
to attack the Amalekites; while he, with Aaron and Hur, went up the
mountain Horeb. During the engagement, Moses held up his hands to
heaven; and so long as they were maintained in this attitude, the
Israelites prevailed, but when through weariness they fell, the
Amalekites prevailed. Aaron and Hur, seeing this, held up his hands till
the latter were entirely defeated with great slaughter, Exod. xvii.

The Amalekites were indeed the earliest and the most bitter enemies the
Jews had to encounter. They attacked them in the desert; and sought
every opportunity afterward of molesting them. Under the judges, the
Amalekites, in conjunction with the Midianites, invaded the land of
Israel; when they were defeated by Gideon, Judges vi, vii. But God, for
their first act of treachery, had declared that he would “utterly put
out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven;” a denunciation which
was not long after accomplished. Saul destroyed their entire army, with
the exception of Agag their king; for sparing whom, and permitting the
Israelites to take the spoil of their foes, he incurred the displeasure
of the Lord, who took the sceptre from him. Agag was immediately
afterward hewn in pieces by Samuel, 1 Sam. xv. It is remarkable, that
most authors make Saul’s pursuit of the Amalekites to commence from the
lower Euphrates, instead of from the southern border of the land of
Canaan. (See _Havilah_.) David a few years after, defeated another of
their armies; of whom only four hundred men escaped on camels, 1 Sam.
xxx; after which event, the Amalekites appear to have been obliterated
as a nation.

AMASA, the son of Ithra and Abigail, David’s sister, whom Absalom, when
he rebelled against his father, appointed general of his army, 2 Sam.
xvii, 25. Amasa having thus received the command of Absalom’s troops,
engaged his cousin Joab, general of David’s army, and was worsted. But,
after the defeat of Absalom’s party, David, being angry at Joab for
killing Absalom, pardoned Amasa, and gave him the command of his own
army. Upon the revolt of Sheba, the son of Bichri, David gave orders to
Amasa to assemble all Judah and march against Sheba. Amasa not being
able to form his army in the time prescribed, David directed Abishai to
pursue Sheba with the guards. Joab, with his people, accompanied him;
and these troops were scarcely got as far as the great stone in Gibeon,
before Amasa came and joined them with his forces. Then said Joab to
Amasa, “Art thou in health, my brother?” and took him by the beard with
his right hand to kiss him; and treacherously smote him under the fifth
rib, so that he expired.

AMAZIAH, one of the kings of Judah, 2 Chron. xxiv, 27, son of Joash,
succeeded his father A. M. 3165, B. C. 839. He was twenty-five years of
age when he began to reign, and reigned twenty-nine years at Jerusalem.
“He did good in the sight of the Lord, but not with a perfect heart.”
When settled in his kingdom, he put to death the murderers of his
father, but avoided a barbarous practice then too common, to destroy
also their children; in which he had respect to the precept, “The
fathers shall not be put to death for the children, neither shall the
children be put to death for the fathers; every man shall be put to
death for his own sin,” Deut. xxiv, 16; 2 Chron. xxv, 1–3.

In the muster which Amaziah made of his people, he found three hundred
thousand men able to bear arms. He hired, besides, one hundred thousand
men of Israel; for which he paid the king of Israel a hundred talents,
about thirty-four thousand pounds English. His design was to employ
these troops against Edom, which had revolted from Judah, in the reign
of Joram, about fifty-four years before, 2 Kings, viii, 20. But a
prophet of the Lord came to him, and said, “O king, let not the army of
Israel go with thee; for the Lord is not with Israel.” Amaziah,
hereupon, sent back those troops; and they returning, strongly irritated
against Amaziah, dispersed themselves over the cities of Judah, from
Bethoron to Samaria, killed three thousand men, and carried off a great
booty, to make themselves amends for the loss of the plunder of Edom.
Amaziah, with his own forces gave battle to the Edomites in the Valley
of Salt, and defeated them; but having thus punished Edom, and taken
their idols, he adored them as his own deities. This provoked the Lord,
who permitted Amaziah to be so blinded as to believe himself invincible.
He therefore sent to defy the king of Israel, saying, “Come, let us look
one another in the face.” The motive of this challenge was probably to
oblige Joash, king of Israel, to repair the ravages which his troops had
committed on their return homewards. Joash answered him by the fable of
the cedar of Lebanon, and the thistle trodden down by a beast, 2 Kings
xiv, 8, 9. But Amaziah, deaf to these reasonings, advanced to
Bethshemesh, and was defeated and taken prisoner there, by Joash, who
carried him to Jerusalem. Joash ordered the demolition of four hundred
cubits of the city wall, carried to Samaria all the gold and silver, the
rich vessels of the house of God, the treasuries of the royal palace,
and the sons of those among his own people who had been hostages there.
Amaziah reigned after this, fifteen or sixteen years at Jerusalem, but
returned not to the Lord. He endeavoured to escape from a conspiracy to
Lachish; but was assassinated. He was buried with his ancestors in the
city of David, and Uzziah, or Azariah, his son, about sixteen years of
age, succeeded him.

AMBASSADOR, a messenger sent by a sovereign, to transact affairs of
great moment. Ministers of the Gospel are called ambassadors, because,
in the name of Jesus Christ the King of kings, they declare his will to
men, and propose the terms of their reconciliation to God, 2 Cor. v, 20;
Eph. vi, 20. Eliakim, Shebna, and Joah, the servants of king Hezekiah,
were called “ambassadors of peace.” In their master’s name they
earnestly solicited a peace from the Assyrian monarch, but were made “to
weep bitterly” with the disappointment and refusal, Isaiah xxxiii, 7.

AMBER, השמל, Ezek. i, 4, 27; viii, 2. The amber is a hard inflammable
bitumen. When rubbed it is highly endowed with that remarkable property
called electricity, a word which the moderns have formed from its Greek
name ἠλέκτρον. But the ancients had also a mixed metal of fine copper
and silver, resembling the amber in colour, and called by the same name.
From the version of Ezekiel i, 4, by the LXX, Καὶ ἐν τῷ μέσω ἀυτου ὡς
ὅρασις ἠλεκτρȣ ἐν μέσῳ τοῦ ϖυρὸς, “And in the midst of it as the
appearance of electrum in the midst of the fire,” it appears that those
translators by ἠλέκτρον, could not mean amber, which grows dim as soon
as it feels the fire, and quickly dissolves into a resinous or pitchy
substance; but the mixed metal above mentioned, which is much celebrated
by the ancients for its beautiful lustre, and which, when exposed to the
fire like other metals, grows more bright and shining. St. Jerom,
Theodoret, St. Gregory and Origen think, that, in the above cited
passages from Ezekiel, a precious and highly polished metal is meant.

AMEN. אמן, in Hebrew, signifies _true_, _faithful_, _certain_. It is
used likewise in affirmation; and was often thus employed by our
Saviour: “Amen, amen,” that is, “Verily, verily.” It is also understood
as expressing a wish, “Amen! so be it!” or an affirmation, “Amen, yes, I
believe it:” Num. v, 22. She shall answer, “Amen! Amen!” Deut. xxvii,
15, 16, 17, &c. “All the people shall answer, Amen! Amen!” 1 Cor. xiv,
16. “How shall he who occupieth the place of the unlearned, say, Amen!
at thy giving of thanks? seeing he understandeth not what thou sayest.”
“The promises of God are Amen in Christ;” that is, certain, confirmed,
granted, 2 Cor. i, 20. The Hebrews end the five books of Psalms,
according to their distribution of them, with “Amen, amen;” which the
Septuagint translate, Γένοιτο, γένοιτο, and the Latins, _Fiat, fiat_.
The Gospels, &c, are ended with AMEN. The Greek, Latin, and other
churches, preserve this word in their prayers, as well as alleluia and
hosanna. At the conclusion of the public prayers, the people anciently
answered with a loud voice, “Amen!” and Jerom says, that, at Rome, when
the people answered, “Amen!” the sound was like a clap of thunder, _in
similitudinem cœlestis tonitrui Amen reboat_. [Amen rings again like
a peal of thunder.] The Jews assert that the gates of heaven are opened
to him who answers, “Amen!” with all his might.

The Jewish doctors give three rules for pronouncing the word: 1. That it
be not pronounced too hastily and rapidly, but with a grave and distinct
voice. 2. That it be not louder than the tone of him that blesses. 3.
That it be expressed in faith, with a certain persuasion that God would
bless them, and hear their prayers.

AMEN is a title of our Lord, “The Amen, the true and faithful witness,”
Rev. i, 14.

AMETHYST. אחלמה, Exod. xxviii, 19; and xxix, 12; and once in the New
Testament, Rev. XXI, 20, ἀμέθυϛος.

A transparent gem, of a colour which seems composed of a strong blue and
deep red; and, according as either prevails, affords different tinges of
purple, sometimes approaching to violet, and sometimes even fading to a
rose colour. The stone called amethyst by the ancients was evidently the
same with that now generally known by this name; which is far from being
the case with regard to some other gems. The oriental is the hardest,
scarcest, and most valuable. It was the ninth stone in the pectoral of
the high priest, and is mentioned as the twelfth in the foundations of
the New Jerusalem.

AMMINADAB, or ABINADAB, a Levite, and an inhabitant of Kirjath-jearim,
with whom the ark was deposited after it was brought back from the land
of the Philistines, 1 Sam. vii. This Amminadab dwelt in Gibeath, that is
to say, in the highest part of the city of Kirjath-jearim.

2. The chariots of Amminadab are mentioned, Canticles vi, 12, as being
extremely light. He is thought to have been some celebrated charioteer,
whose horses were singularly swift.

AMMON, or HAMMON, or JUPITER-AMMON, an epithet given to Jupiter in
Lybia, where was a celebrated temple of that deity under the
denomination of Jupiter Ammon, which was visited by Alexander the Great.

The word _Amoun_, which imports “shining,” according to Jablonski,
denoted the effects produced by the sun on attaining the equator, such
as the increase of the days; a more splendid light; and, above all, the
fortunate presage of the inundation of the Nile, and its consequent
abundance.

Ammon is by others derived from Ham, the son of Noah, who first peopled
Egypt and Lybia, after the flood; and, when idolatry began to gain
ground soon after this period, became the chief deity of those two
countries, in which his descendants continued. A temple, it is said, was
built to his honour, in the midst of the sandy deserts of Lybia, upon a
spot of good ground, about two leagues broad, which formed a kind of
island or oasis in a sea of sand. He was esteemed the Zeus of Greece,
and the Jupiter of Latium, as well as the Ammon of the Egyptians. In
process of time, these two names were joined; and he was called Jupiter
Ammon. For this reason the city of Ammon, No-ammon, or the city of Ham,
was called by the Greeks Diospolis, or the city of Jupiter. Plutarch
says, that of all the Egyptian deities which seemed to have any
correspondence with the Zeus of Greece, Amon or Ammon was the most
peculiar and appropriate. From Egypt his name and worship were brought
into Greece; as indeed were almost all the names of all the deities that
were there worshipped. Jupiter Ammon, or the Egyptian Jupiter, was
usually represented under the figure of a ram; though in some medals he
appears of a human shape, having only two ram’s horns growing out
beneath his ears. The Egyptians, says Proclus, in the Timæus of Plato,
had a singular veneration for the ram, because the image of Ammon bore
its head, and because this first sign of the zodiac was the presage of
the fruits of the earth. Eusebius adds, that this symbol marked the
conjunction of the sun and moon in the sign of the ram.

2. AMMON, or BEN-AMMI, the son of Lot, by his youngest daughter, Gen.
xix, 38. He was the father of the Ammonites, and dwelt on the east side
of the Dead Sea, in the mountains of Gilead.

AMMONIANS, the disciples of Ammonius Saccas, of the Alexandrian school.
His character was so equivocal, that it is disputed whether he was a
Heathen or a Christian. Mr. Milner calls him “a Pagan Christian,” who
imagined “that all religions, vulgar and philosophical, Grecian and
barbarous, Jewish and Gentile, meant the same thing in substance. He
undertook, by allegorizing and subtilizing various fables and systems,
to make up a coalition of all sects and religions; and from his labours,
continued by his disciples,--some of whose works still remain,--his
followers were taught to look on Jew, philosopher, vulgar, Pagan, and
Christian, as all of the same creed,” and worshippers of the same God,
whether denominated “Jehovah, Jove, or Lord.”

AMMONITES, the descendants of Ammon, the son of Lot. They took
possession of the country called by their name, after having driven out
the Zamzummims, who were its ancient inhabitants. The precise period at
which this expulsion took place is not ascertained. The Ammonites had
kings, and were uncircumcised, Jer. ix, 25, 26, and seem to have been
principally addicted to husbandry. They, as well as the Moabites, were
among the nations whose peace or prosperity the Israelites were
forbidden to disturb, Deut. ii, 19, &c. However, neither the one nor the
other were to be admitted into the congregation to the tenth generation,
because they did not come out to relieve them in the wilderness, and
were implicated in hiring Balaam to curse them. Their chief and peculiar
deity is, in Scripture, called Moloch. Chemosh was also a god of the
Ammonites. Before the Israelites entered Canaan, the Amorites conquered
a great part of the country belonging to the Ammonites and Moabites; but
it was retaken by Moses, and divided between the tribes of Gad and
Reuben. Previous to the time of Jephthah, B. C. 1188, the Ammonites
engaged as principals in a war, under a king whose name is not given,
against the Israelites. This prince, determining to recover the ancient
country of the Ammonites, made a sudden irruption into it, reduced the
land, and kept the inhabitants in subjection for eighteen years. He
afterward crossed Jordan with a design of falling upon the tribes of
Judah, Benjamin, and Ephraim. The Israelites resisted the invader; and,
assembling at Mizpeh, chose Jephthah for their general, and sent an
expostulatory message to the king of the Ammonites, Judges x, xi. The
king replied, that those lands belonged to the Ammonites, who had been
unjustly dispossessed of them by the Israelites, when they came out of
Egypt, and exhorted Jephthah to restore them peaceably to the lawful
owners. Jephthah remonstrated on the injustice of his claim; but finding
a war inevitable, he fell upon the Ammonites near Aroer, and defeated
them with great slaughter. On this occasion the Ammonites lost twenty
cities; and thus an end was put, after eighteen years’ bondage, to the
tyranny of Ammon over the Israelites beyond Jordan. In the days of Saul,
1 Sam. xi, B. C. 1095, the old claim of the Ammonites was revived by
Nahash their king, and they laid siege to the city of Jabesh. The
inhabitants were inclined to acknowledge Nahash as their sovereign; but
he would accept their submission only on condition that every one of
them should consent to lose his right eye, and that thus he might fix a
lasting reproach upon Israel: but from this humiliating and severe
requisition they were delivered by Saul, who vanquished and dispersed
the army of Nahash. Upon the death of Nahash, David sent ambassadors to
his son and successor Hanun, to congratulate him on his accession; but
these ambassadors were treated as spies, and dismissed in a very
reproachful manner, 2 Sam. x. This indignity was punished by David with
rigour. Rabbah, the capital of Hanun, and the other cities of Ammon,
which resisted the progress of the conqueror, were destroyed and razed
to the ground; and the inhabitants were put to death or reduced to
servitude. In the reign of Jehoshaphat the Ammonites united with their
brethren, the Moabites, and the inhabitants of Mount Seir, against the
king of Judah; but they were completely routed. They were afterward
overthrown by Uzziah, king of Judah, and made tributary, 2 Chron. xxvi,
8; and rebelling in the reign of his son Jotham, they were reduced to
the necessity of purchasing peace at a very dear rate. After the tribes
of Reuben, Gad, and the half tribe of Manasseh, were carried into
captivity by Tiglath Pileser, B. C. 740, the Ammonites and Moabites took
possession of the cities belonging to these tribes, and were reproached
for it by Jeremiah, xlix, 1. Their ambassadors were exhorted to submit
to Nebuchadnezzar, and threatened, on their refusal, with captivity and
slavery, Jer. xxvii, 2, 3, 4. The Prophet Ezekiel, xxv, 4–10, denounces
their entire destruction, and informs them, that God would deliver them
up to the people of the east; and that the Ammonites should no more be
mentioned among the nations: and this punishment they were to suffer for
insulting the Israelites on account of their calamities, and the
destruction of their temple by the Chaldeans. This malediction began to
be inflicted upon them in the fifth year after the taking of Jerusalem,
when Nebuchadnezzar made war against all the people around Judea, A. M.
3420 or 3421, B. C. 583. It is probable that Cyrus granted to the
Ammonites and Moabites liberty to return into their own country, whence
they had been removed by Nebuchadnezzar; for they were exposed to the
revolutions that were common to the people of Syria and Palestine, and
were subject sometimes to the kings of Egypt, and sometimes to the kings
of Syria. Polybius informs us, that Antiochus the Great took Rabboth, or
Philadelphia, the capital of the Ammonites, demolished the walls, and
put a garrison into it, A. M. 3806, B. C. 198. During the persecutions
of Antiochus Epiphanes, the Ammonites manifested their hatred to the
Jews, and exercised great cruelties against such of them as lived in
their parts. At length their city Jaser, and the neighbouring town, fell
a prey to the Jews, who smote the men, carried their wives and children
into captivity, and plundered and burned the city. Thus ended their last
conflict with the descendants of Israel. Ammon was, however, a highly
productive and populous country when the Romans became masters of all
the provinces of Syria; and several of the ten allied cities, which gave
name to the celebrated Decapolis, were included within its boundaries.
Even when first invaded by the Saracens, this country, including Moab,
was enriched by the various benefits of trade, covered with a line of
forts, and possessed some strong and populous cities. Volney bears
witness, “that in the immense plains of the Hauran, ruins are
continually to be met with, and that what is said of its actual
fertility perfectly corresponds with the idea given of it in the Hebrew
writings.” The fact of its natural fertility is corroborated by every
traveller who has visited it. And “it is evident,” says Burckhardt,
“that the whole country must have been extremely well cultivated in
order to have afforded subsistence to the inhabitants of so many towns,”
as are now visible only in their ruins. While the fruitfulness of the
land of Ammon, and the high degree of prosperity and power in which it
subsisted long prior and long subsequent to the date of the predictions,
are thus indisputably established by historical evidence and by existing
proofs, the researches of recent travellers (who were actuated by the
mere desire of exploring these regions and obtaining geographical
information) have made known its present aspect; and testimony the most
clear, unexceptionable, and conclusive, has been borne to the state of
dire desolation to which it is and has long been reduced.

It was prophesied concerning Ammon, “Son of man, set thy face against
the Ammonites, and prophesy against them. I will make Rabbah of the
Ammonites a stable for camels and a couching place for flocks. Behold, I
will stretch out my hand upon thee, and deliver thee for a spoil to the
Heathen; I will cut thee off from the people, and cause thee to perish
out of the countries; I will destroy thee. The Ammonites shall not be
remembered among the nations. Rabbah” (the chief city) “of the Ammonites
shall be a desolate heap. Ammon shall be a perpetual desolation,” Ezek.
xxv, 2, 5, 7, 10; xxi, 32; Jer. xlix, 2; Zeph. ii, 9.

Ammon was to be delivered to be a spoil to the Heathen--to be destroyed,
and to be a perpetual desolation. “All this country, formerly so
populous and flourishing, is now changed into a vast desert.”
(_Seetzen’s Travels._) Ruins are seen in every direction. The country is
divided between the Turks and the Arabs, but chiefly possessed by the
latter. The extortions of the one, and the depredations of the other,
keep it in “perpetual desolation,” and make it “a spoil to the Heathen.”
“The far greater part of the country is uninhabited, being abandoned to
the wandering Arabs, and the towns and villages are in a state of total
ruin.” (_Ibid._) “At every step are to be found the vestiges of ancient
cities, the remains of many temples, public edifices, and Greek
churches.” (_Burckhardt’s Travels._) The cities are left desolate. “Many
of the ruins present no objects of any interest. They consist of a few
walls of dwelling houses, heaps of stones, the foundations of some
public edifices, and a few cisterns filled up; there is nothing entire,
though it appears that the mode of building was very solid, all the
remains being formed of large stones. In the vicinity of Ammon there is
a fertile plain interspersed with low hills, which for the greater part
are covered with ruins.” (_Burckhardt’s Travels in Syria._) While the
country is thus despoiled and desolate, there are valleys and tracts
throughout it which “are covered with a fine coat of verdant pasture,
and are places of resort to the Bedouins, where they pasture their
camels and their sheep.” (_Buckingham’s Travels in Palestine._) “The
whole way we traversed,” says Seetzen, “we saw villages in ruins, and
met numbers of Arabs with their camels,” &c. Mr. Buckingham describes a
building among the ruins of Ammon, “the masonry of which was evidently
constructed of materials gathered from the ruins of other and older
buildings on the spot. On entering it at the south end,” he adds, “we
came to an open square court, with arched recesses on each side, the
sides nearly facing the cardinal points. The recesses in the northern
and southern wall were originally open passages, and had arched door
ways facing each other; but the first of these was found wholly closed
up, and the last was partially filled up, leaving only a narrow passage,
just sufficient for the entrance of one man and of the goats, which the
Arab keepers drive in here occasionally for shelter during the night.”
He relates that he lay down among “flocks of sheep and goats,” close
beside the ruins of Ammon; and particularly remarks that, during the
night, he “was almost entirely prevented from sleeping by the bleating
of flocks.” So literally true is it, although Seetzen, and Burckhardt,
and Buckingham, who relate the facts, make no reference or allusion
whatever to any of the prophecies, and travelled for a different object
than the elucidation of the Scriptures,--that “the chief city of the
Ammonites is a stable for camels, and a couching place for flocks.”

“The Ammonites shall not be remembered among the nations.” While the
Jews, who were long their hereditary enemies, continue as distinct a
people as ever, though dispersed among all nations, no trace of the
Ammonites remains; none are now designated by their name, nor do any
claim descent from them. They did exist, however, long after the time
when the eventual annihilation of their race was foretold; for they
retained their name, and continued a great multitude until the second
century of the Christian æra. (_Justin Martyr._) “Yet they are cut off
from the people. Ammon has perished out of the countries; it is
destroyed.” No people is attached to its soil; none regard it as their
country and adopt its name: “And the Ammonites are not remembered among
the nations.”

“Rabbah” (Rabbah Ammon, the chief city of Ammon) “shall be a desolate
heap.” Situated, as it was, on each side of the borders of a plentiful
stream, encircled by a fruitful region, strong by nature and fortified
by art, nothing could have justified the suspicion, or warranted the
conjecture in the mind of an uninspired mortal, that the royal city of
Ammon, whatever disasters might possibly befal it in the fate of war or
change of masters, would ever undergo so total a transmutation as to
become a desolate heap. But although, in addition to such tokens of its
continuance as a city, more than a thousand years had given
uninterrupted experience of its stability, ere the prophets of Israel
denounced its fate; yet a period of equal length has now marked it out,
as it exists to this day, a desolate heap, a perpetual or permanent
desolation. Its ancient name is still preserved by the Arabs, and its
site is now “covered with the ruins of private buildings--nothing of
them remaining except the foundations and some of the door posts. The
buildings, exposed to the atmosphere, are all in decay,” (_Burckhardt’s
Travels in Syria_,) so that they may be said literally to form a
desolate heap. The public edifices, which once strengthened or adorned
the city, after a long resistance to decay, are now also desolate; and
the remains of the most entire among them, subjected as they are to the
abuse and spoliation of the wild Arabs, can be adapted to no better
object than “a stable for camels.” Yet these broken walls and ruined
palaces, says Mr. Keith, which attest the ancient splendour of Ammon,
can now be made subservient, by means of a single act of reflection, to
a far nobler purpose than the most magnificent edifices on earth can be,
when they are contemplated as monuments on which the historic and
prophetic truth of Scripture is blended in one bright inscription.

AMORITES, the descendants of Amori, or Hæmorri, or Amorrhæus, Gen. x,
16, the fourth son of Canaan, whose first possessions were in the
mountains of Judea, among the other families of Canaan: but, growing
strong above their fellows, and impatient of confinement within the
narrow boundaries of their native district, they passed the Jordan, and
extended their conquests over the finest provinces of Moab and Ammon;
seizing and maintaining possession of that extensive and almost
insulated portion of country included between the rivers Jordan, Jabbok,
and Arnon. This was the kingdom, and Heshbon the capital, of the
Amorites, under Sihon their king, when the Israelites, in their way from
Egypt, requested a passage through their country. This request, however,
Sihon refused; and came out against them with all his force, when he was
slain, his people extirpated, and his kingdom taken possession of by the
Israelites. It was subsequently divided between the tribes of Reuben and
Gad, Num. xiii, 29; xxi, 13, 25; Joshua v, 1; xi, 3; Judges xi, 19, 22.

AMOS, the fourth of the minor prophets, who in his youth had been a
herdsman in Tekoa, a small town about four leagues southward of
Jerusalem. He was sent to the people of Samaria, to bring them back to
God by repentance, and reformation of manners. Hence it is natural to
suppose that he must have been born within the territories of Israel,
and that he only retired to Tekoa, on being expelled from Bethel by
Amaziah, the priest of the calves at Bethel. He frequently complains of
the violence offered him by those who endeavoured to impose silence on
him. He boldly inveighs against the crying sins of the Israelites, such
as idolatry, oppression, wantonness, and obstinacy. Nor does he spare
the sins of Judah, such as their carnal security, sensuality, and
injustice. He utters frequent threatenings against them both, and
predicts their ruin. It is observable in this prophecy, that, as it
begins with denunciations of judgment and destruction against the
Syrians, Philistines, Tyrians, and other enemies of the Jews, so it
concludes with comfortable promises of the restoration of the tabernacle
of David, and the establishment of the kingdom of Christ. Amos was
called to the prophetic office in the time of Uzziah, king of Judah, and
Jeroboam, the son of Joash, king of Israel.

Some writers, in adverting to the condition of Amos, have, with a minute
affectation of criticism, pretended to discover a certain rudeness and
vulgarity in his style; and even Jerom is of opinion that he is
deficient in magnificence and sublimity. He applies to him the words
which St. Paul speaks of himself, that he was rude in speech, though not
in knowledge; and his authority, says Bishop Lowth, “has influenced many
commentators to represent him as entirely rude, and void of elegance;
whereas it requires but little attention to be convinced that he is not
a whit behind the very chiefest of the prophets;” equal to the greatest
in loftiness of sentiment, and scarcely inferior to any in the splendour
of his diction, and in the elegance of his composition. Mr. Locke has
observed, that his comparisons are chiefly drawn from lions, and other
animals, because he lived among, and was conversant with, such objects.
But, indeed, the finest images and allusions, which adorn the poetical
parts of Scripture, in general are drawn from scenes of nature, and from
the grand objects that range in her walks; and true genius ever delights
in considering these as the real sources of beauty and magnificence. The
whole book of Amos is animated with a fine and masculine eloquence.

AMULET, a charm or supposed preservative against diseases, witchcraft,
or any other mischief. They were very frequent among the Jews, the
Greeks, and the Romans, and were made of stone, metal, animal
substances, or, in short, any thing which a weak imagination suggested.
The Jews were very superstitious in the use of amulets, but the Mishna
forbids them, unless received from some person of whose cures, at least,
three instances could be produced. The phylacteries worn by the
Pharisees and others of the Jewish nation were a sort of amulets.

Amulets among the Greeks were called, φυλακτήρια, περιάπτα,
ἀποτέλεσματα, περιάμματα, βρήβια, and εξκόλπια. The Latins called them
_amuleta, appensa, pentacula, &c._ Remains of this superstition continue
among ignorant people even in this country, which ought to be strongly
discountenanced as weak or wicked. The word amulet is probably derived
from _amula_, a small vessel with lustral water in it, anciently carried
in the pocket for the sake of purification and expiation.

AMYRALDISM, a name given by some writers to the doctrine of universal
grace, as explained and asserted by Amyraldus, or Moses Amyraut, and his
followers, among the reformed in France, toward the middle of the
seventeenth century. This doctrine principally consisted of the
following particulars, viz. that God desires the happiness of all men,
from which none are excluded by a divine decree; that none can obtain
salvation without faith in Christ; that God refuses to none the power of
believing, though he does not grant to all his assistance, that they may
improve this power to saving purposes; and that many perish through
their own fault. Those who embraced this doctrine were called
Universalists, although, it is evident that they rendered grace
universal in words, but partial in reality, and are chargeable with
greater inconsistencies than the Supralapsarians. Amyraldus is said to
have formed his system with a view of producing a reconciliation between
the Lutherans and Calvinists. This theory was supported in England by
Baxter. See BAXTERIANISM.

ANABAPTISTS, a name given to those Christians who maintain that baptism
ought always to be performed by immersion; that it ought not to be
administered to children before the age of discretion; and that at this
age it ought to be readministered to those who have been baptized in
their infancy. They affirm that the administration of this sacrament is
neither valid nor useful, if it be done by sprinkling only, and not by
immersion; or if the persons who receive it be not in a condition to
give the reasons of their belief. The Anabaptists of Germany brought the
name into great odium by their turbulent conduct; but by the people of
this persuasion generally, the conduct of these fanatics was at all
times condemned. In England they form a most respectable, though not a
very numerous body.

The word Anabaptist is compounded of ἀνὰ, new, and βαπτιϛὴς, a baptist;
and has been indiscriminately applied to people of very different
principles. Many of them object to the name, because the baptism of
infants by sprinkling is, in their opinion, no baptism; and others hold
nothing in common excepting some one or other of the above mentioned
opinions concerning baptism. See BAPTISM.

ANAGOGICAL. This is one of the four senses in which Scripture may be
interpreted, viz. the literal, allegorical, anagogical, and
tropological. The anagogical sense is given when the text is explained
with regard to the end which Christians should have in view, that is,
eternal life: for example, the rest of the Sabbath, in the anagogical
sense, corresponds to the repose of everlasting blessedness.

ANAK, ANAKIM, famous giants in Palestine. Anak, father of the Anakim,
was son of Arba, who gave his name to Kirjath-Arba, or Hebron. Anak had
three sons, Sheshai, Ahiman, and Talmai, whose descendants were terrible
for their fierceness and stature. The Hebrew spies reported that in
comparison of those monstrous men, they themselves were but
grasshoppers. Some have thought that the name _Phœnician_, given to
the Canaanites, and particularly to the Sidonians, was originally from
_Bene-Anak_, sons of Anak. Caleb, assisted by the tribe of Judah, took
Kirjath-Arba, and destroyed the Anakim, A. M. 2559. Josh. xv, 14; Judg.
i, 20.

ANALOGY OF FAITH. This has been often and largely descanted upon as an
important rule for interpreting Scripture, founded, as it is said, upon
Rom. xii, 6, “Let us prophesy according to the proportion” (_analogy_)
“of faith.”

The principle of this rule has been thus stated: It is evident the
Almighty doth not act without a design in the system of Christianity,
any more than in the works of nature. Now this design must be uniform;
for as in the system of the universe every part is proportioned to the
whole, and made subservient to it,--so, in the system of the Gospel, all
the various truths, doctrines, declarations, precepts, and promises must
correspond with, and tend to, the end designed. For instance, supposing
the glory of God in the salvation of sinners by free grace be the grand
design,--then, whatever doctrine, assertion, or hypothesis agrees not
with this, it is to be considered as false. The effect however of this
view of the case appears to be often delusive. If nothing more be meant
than that, what is obscure in a revelation should be interpreted by that
which is plain, the same rule applies to all sober interpretations of
any book whatever; but if we call our opinions, perhaps hastily taken
up, or admitted on some authority without examination by the light of
Scripture, “the analogy of faith,” we shall greatly err. On this subject
Dr. Campbell remarks:--

“In vain do we search the Scriptures for their testimony concerning
Christ, if, independently of these Scriptures, we have received a
testimony from another quarter, and are determined to admit nothing as
the testimony of Scripture which will not perfectly quadrate with that
formerly received. This was the very source of the blindness of the Jews
in our Saviour’s time. They searched the Scriptures as much as we do;
but, in the disposition they were in, they would never have discovered
what that sacred volume testifies of Christ. Why? because their great
rule of interpretation was _the analogy of the faith_; or, in other
words, the system of the Pharisean scribes, the doctrine then in vogue,
and in the profound veneration of which they had been educated. This is
that veil by which the understandings of that people were darkened, even
in reading the law, and of which the Apostle observed, that it remained
unremoved in his day, and of which we ourselves have occasion to
observe, that it remains unremoved in ours. And is it not precisely in
the same way that the phrase is used by every sect of Christians, for
the particular system or digest of tenets for which they themselves have
the greatest reverence? The Latin church, and even the Greek, are
explicit in their declarations on this article. With each, _the analogy
of the faith_ is their own system alone. And that different parties of
Protestants, though more reserved in their manner of speaking, aim at
the same thing, is undeniable; the same, I mean, considered relatively
to the speakers; for, absolutely considered, every party means a
different thing. ‘But,’ say some, ‘is not this mode of interpretation
warranted by Apostolical authority? Does not Paul, Rom. xii, 6, in
speaking of the exercise of the spiritual gifts, enjoin the prophets to
prophesy κατὰ τὴν ἀναλογίαν τῆς ϖίϛεως, _according to the proportion of
faith_, as our translators render it, but as some critics explain it,
_according to the analogy of the faith_?’ Though this exposition has
been admitted into some versions, and adopted by Hammond and other
commentators, and may be called literal, it is suited neither to the
ordinary meaning of the words, nor to the tenor of the context. The word
ἀναλογία strictly denotes proportion, measure, rate, but by no means
that complex notion conveyed in the aforesaid phrase by the term
_analogy_, which has been well observed by Whitby to be particularly
unsuitable in this place, where the Apostle treats of those who speak by
inspiration, not of those who explain what has been thus spoken by
others. The context manifestly leads us to understand ἀναλογία ϖίϛεως,
verse 6, as equivalent to μέτρον ϖίστεως, verse 3. And for the better
understanding of this phrase, _the measure of faith_, it may be proper
to observe, 1. That a strong conviction of any tenet, from whatever
cause it arises, is in Scripture sometimes termed _faith_. Thus in the
same epistle, Rom. xiv, 22, the Apostle says, ‘Hast thou faith? have it
to thyself before God.’ The scope of his reasoning shows that nothing is
there meant by faith, but a conviction of the truth in regard to the
article of which he had been treating, namely, the equality of days and
meats, in point of sanctity, under the Gospel dispensation. The same is
evidently the meaning of the word, verse 23, ‘Whatsoever is not of
faith, is sin;’ where, without regard to the morality of an action
abstractly considered, that is concluded to be sin which is done by one
who doubts of its lawfulness. 2. As to spiritual gifts, prophecy and
inspiration in particular, they appear to have been accompanied with
such a faith or conviction that they came from the Spirit, as left no
room for hesitation. And indeed it is easy to perceive that something of
this kind was absolutely necessary to enable the inspired person to
distinguish what proceeded from the Spirit of God, from what was the
creature of his own imagination. The prophets of God were not acted upon
like machines in delivering their predictions, as the diviners were
supposed to be among the Heathen, but had then, as at other times, the
free use of their faculties, both of body and mind.” This caution is
therefore with great propriety given them by the Apostle, to induce them
to be attentive in prophesying, not to exceed the precise measure
allowed them, (for different measures of the same gift were committed to
different persons,) and not to mingle aught of their own with the things
of God’s Spirit. Let him prophesy according to the proportion in which
he has received this gift, which is in proportion to his faith. Though a
sense somewhat different has been given to the words by some ancient
Greek expositors, none of them seems to have formed a conception of that
sense, which, as was observed above, has been given by some moderns.
This has, nevertheless, a sound and sober principle included in it,
although capable of great abuse. Undoubtedly there is a class of great
and leading truths in the Scriptures so clearly revealed as to afford
principles of interpretation in doubtful passages, and these are so
obvious that persons of sound minds and hearts will not need those
formal rules for the application of the analogy of faith to
interpretation, which have been drawn up by several writers, and which
when not misleading, are generally superfluous.

ANANIAS was the son of Nebedæus, high priest of the Jews. According to
Josephus, he succeeded Joseph, the son of Camith, in the forty-seventh
year of the Christian æra; and was himself succeeded by Ishmael, the son
of Tabæus, in the year 63. Quadratus, governor of Syria, coming into
Judæa, on the rumours which prevailed among the Samaritans and Jews,
sent the high priest Ananias to Rome, to vindicate his conduct to the
emperor. The high priest justified himself, was acquitted, and returned.
St. Paul being apprehended at Jerusalem by the tribune of the Roman
troops that guarded the temple, declared to him that he was a citizen of
Rome. This obliged the officer to treat him with some regard. As he was
ignorant of what the Jews accused him, the next day he convened the
priests, and placed St. Paul in the midst of them, that he might justify
himself. St. Paul began as follows: “Men and brethren, I have lived in
all good conscience before God until this day.” He had scarcely spoken
this, when the high priest, Ananias, commanded those who were near him
to smite him on the face. The Apostle immediately replied, “God shall
judge thee, thou whited wall; for, sittest thou to judge me after the
law, and commandest me to be smitten contrary to the law?” They that
stood by said, “Revilest thou God’s high priest?” And Paul answered, “I
wist not, brethren, that he was the high priest; for it is written, Thou
shalt not speak evil of the ruler of thy people,” Acts xxii, 23, 24;
xxiii, 1–5; by which words many suppose that the Apostle spake in bitter
irony; or at least that he considered Ananias as a usurper of the office
of the priesthood.

After this, the assembly being divided in opinion, St. Paul was sent by
the tribune to Cæsarea, that Felix, governor of the province, might take
cognizance of the affair. When it was known that the Apostle had arrived
at Cæsarea, Ananias the high priest, and other Jews, went thither to
accuse him; but the affair was adjourned, and St. Paul continued two
years in prison in that city, Acts xxiv.

The Apostle’s prediction that God would smite Ananias, was thus
accomplished: Albinus, governor of Judæa, being come into that country,
Ananias found means to gain him by presents; and Ananias, by reason of
this patronage, was considered as the first man of his nation. However,
there were in his party some violent persons, who plundered the country,
and seized the tithes of the priests; and this they did with impunity,
on account of the great credit of Ananias. At the same time, several
companies of assassins infested Judæa, and committed great ravages. When
any of their companions fell into the hands of the governors of the
province, and were about to be executed, they failed not to seize some
domestic or relation of the high priest Ananias, that he might procure
the liberty of their associates, in exchange for those whom they
detained. Having taken Eleazer, one of Ananias’s sons, they did not
release him till ten of their companions were liberated. By this means
their number considerably increased, and the country was exposed to
their ravages. At length, Eleazer, the son of Ananias, heading a party
of mutineers, seized the temple, and forbade any sacrifices for the
emperor. Being joined by the assassins, he pulled down the house of his
father Ananias, with his brother, hid himself in the aqueducts belonging
to the royal palace, but was soon discovered, and both of them were
killed. Thus God smote this whited wall, in the very beginning of the
Jewish wars.

2. ANANIAS, one of the first Christians of Jerusalem, who being
converted, with his wife Sapphira, sold his estate; (as did the other
Christians at Jerusalem, under a temporary regulation that they were to
have all things in common;) but privately reserved a part of the
purchase money to himself. Having brought the remainder to St. Peter, as
the whole price of the inheritance sold, the Apostle, to whom the Holy
Ghost had revealed this falsehood, rebuked him severely, as having lied
not unto men but unto God, Acts v. At that instant, Ananias, being
struck dead, fell down at the Apostle’s feet; and in the course of three
hours after, his wife suffered a similar punishment. This happened, A.
D. 33, or 34. It is evident, that in this and similar events, the
spectators and civil magistrates must have been convinced that some
extraordinary power was exerted; for if Peter had himself slain Ananias,
he would have been amenable to the laws as a murderer. But, if by
forewarning him that he should immediately die, and the prediction came
to pass, it is evident that the power which attended this word of Peter
was not from Peter, but from God. This was made the more certain by the
death of two persons, in the same manner, and under the same
circumstances, which could not be attributed to accident.

3. _Ananias_, a disciple of Christ, at Damascus, whom the Lord directed
to visit Paul, then lately converted. Ananias answered, “Lord, I have
heard by many of this man, how much evil he hath done to thy saints at
Jerusalem; and how he hath authority from the chief priests to bind all
that call upon thy name.” But the Lord said unto him, “Go thy way, for
he is a chosen vessel unto me.” Ananias, therefore, went to the house in
which God had revealed unto him that Paul was, and putting his hands on
him, said, “Brother Saul, the Lord Jesus who appeared unto thee in the
way, hath sent me that thou mightest receive thy sight, and be filled
with the Holy Ghost,” Acts ix, 10–12, &c. We are not informed of any
other circumstance of the life of Ananias.

ANATHEMA, from ἀνατίθημι, signifies something set apart, separated, or
devoted, Mic. iv, 13, or the _formula_ by which this is effected. To
anathematize is generally understood to denote the cutting off or
separating any one from the communion of the faithful, the number of the
living, or the privileges of society; or the devoting of an animal,
city, or other thing, to destruction. See ACCURSED.

ANATHEMA MARANATHA. “If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him
be Anathema Maranatha,” 1 Cor. xvi, 22. Why these two words, one Greek
and the other Syriac, were not translated, is not obvious. They are the
words with which the Jews began their greater excommunication, whereby
they not only excluded sinners from their society, but delivered them up
to the divine _cherem_, or anathema, that is, to misery in this life,
and perdition in the life to come. “Let him be Anathema” is, “Let him be
accursed.” Maranatha signifies, “The Lord cometh,” or, “will come;” that
is, to take vengeance. See See ACCURSED.

ANDREW, an Apostle of Jesus Christ, a native of Bethsaida, and the
brother of Peter. He was at first a disciple of John the Baptist, whom
he left to follow our Saviour, after the testimony of John, “Behold the
Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of the world,” John i, 29, and was
the first disciple received by our Saviour. Andrew then introduced his
brother Simon, and they went with him to the marriage in Cana, but
afterward returned to their ordinary occupation, not expecting, perhaps,
to be farther employed in his service. However, some months after, Jesus
meeting them, while fishing together, called them to a regular
attendance upon him, and promised to make them fishers of men, Matt. iv,
19.

After our Saviour’s ascension, tradition states that Andrew was
appointed to preach in Scythia and the neighbouring countries. According
to Eusebius, after this Apostle had planted the Gospel in several
places, he came to Patræ, in Achaia, where, endeavouring to convert the
pro-consul Ægeas, he was, by that governor’s orders, first scourged, and
then crucified. The time of his suffering martyrdom is not known; but
all the ancient and modern martyrologies of the Greeks and Latins agree
in celebrating his festival on the 30th of November. His body was
embalmed, and decently interred at Patræ, by Maximilla, a lady of great
quality and estate. It was afterward removed to Constantinople, by
Constantine the Great, who buried it in the great church which he had
built to the honour of the Apostles. It is not known for what reason
painters represent St. Andrew’s cross like an X. Peter Chrysologus says
that he was crucified upon a tree; and the spurious Hippolytus assures
us that it was an olive tree. Nevertheless, the tradition which
describes him to have been nailed to a cross is very ancient.

ANGEL, a spiritual, intelligent substance, the first in rank and dignity
among created beings. The word angel, ἀγγέλος, is not properly a
denomination of nature but of office; denoting as much as _nuncius_,
messenger, a person employed to carry one’s orders, or declare his will.
Thus it is St. Paul represents angels, Heb. i, 14, where he calls them
“ministering spirits;” and yet custom has prevailed so much, that angel
is now commonly taken for the denomination of a particular order of
spiritual beings, of great understanding and power, superior to the
souls or spirits of men. Some of these are spoken of in Scripture in
such a manner as plainly to signify that they are real beings, of a
spiritual nature, of high power, perfection, dignity, and happiness.
Others of them are distinguished as not having kept their first station,
Jude 6. These are represented as evil spirits, enemies of God, and
intent on mischief. The devil as the head of them, and they as his
angels, are represented as the rulers of the darkness of this world, or
spiritual wickednesses, or wicked spirits, τὰ ϖνευματικὰ τῆς ϖονηρίας ἐν
τοῖς ἐπȣρανίοις, Eph. vi, 12; which may not be unfitly rendered, “the
spiritual managers of opposition to the kingdom of God.”

The existence of angels is supposed in all religions, though it is
incapable of being proved _a priori_. Indeed, the ancient Sadducees are
represented as denying all spirits; and yet the Samaritans, and
Caraites, who are reputed Sadducees, openly allowed them: witness
Abusaid, the author of an Arabic version of the Pentateuch; and Aaron, a
Caraite Jew, in his comment on the Pentateuch; both extant in manuscript
in the king of France’s library. In the Alcoran we find frequent mention
of angels. The Mussulmen believe them of different orders or degrees,
and to be destined for different employments both in heaven and on
earth. They attribute exceedingly great power to the angel Gabriel, as
that he is able to descend in the space of an hour from heaven to earth;
to overturn a mountain with a single feather of his wing, &c. The angel
Asrael, they suppose, is appointed to take the souls of such as die; and
another angel, named Esraphil, they tell us, stands with a trumpet ready
in his mouth to proclaim the day of judgment.

The Heathen philosophers and poets were also agreed as to the existence
of intelligent beings, superior to man; as is shown by St. Cyprian in
his treatise of the vanity of idols; from the testimonies of Plato,
Socrates, Trismegistus, &c. They were acknowledged under different
appellations; the Greeks calling them dæmons, and the Romans genii, or
lares. Epicurus seems to have been the only one among the old
philosophers who absolutely rejected them.

Authors are not so unanimous about the nature as about the existence of
angels. Clemens Alexandrinus believed they had bodies; which was also
the opinion of Origen, Cæsarius, Tertullian, and several others.
Athanasius, St. Basil, St. Gregory Nicene, St. Cyril, St. Chrysostom,
&c, held them to be mere spirits. It has been the more current opinion,
especially in later times, that they are substances entirely spiritual,
who can, at any time, assume bodies, and appear in human or other
shapes. Ecclesiastical writers make a hierarchy of nine orders of
angels. Others have distributed angels into nine orders, according to
the names by which they are called in Scripture, and reduced these
orders into three hierarchies; to the first of which belong seraphim,
cherubim, and thrones; to the second, dominions, virtues, and powers;
and to the third, principalities, archangels, and angels. The Jews
reckon four orders or companies of angels, each headed by an archangel;
the first order being that of Michael; the second, of Gabriel; the
third, of Uriel; and the fourth, of Raphael. Following the Scripture
account, we shall find mention made of different orders of these
superior beings; for such a distinction of orders seems intimated in the
names given to different classes. Thus we have _thrones_, _dominions_,
_principalities_, or princedoms, _powers_, _authorities_, _living ones_,
_cherubim_, and _seraphim_. That some of these titles may indicate the
same class of angels is probable; but that they all should be but
different appellations of one common and equal order is improbable. We
learn also from Scripture, that they dwell in the immediate presence of
God; that they “excel in strength;” that they are immortal; and that
they are the agents through which God very often accomplishes his
special purposes of judgment and mercy. Nothing is more frequent in
Scripture than the missions and appearances of good and bad angels, whom
God employed to declare his will; to correct, teach, reprove, and
comfort. God gave the law to Moses, and appeared to the old patriarchs,
by the mediation of angels, who represented him, and spoke in his name,
Acts vii, 30, 35; Gal. iii, 19; Heb. xiii, 2.

Though the Jews, in general, believed the existence of angels, there was
a sect among them, namely, the Sadducees, who denied the existence of
all spirits whatever, God only excepted, Acts xxiii, 8. Before the
Babylonish captivity, the Hebrews seem not to have known the names of
any angel. The Talmudists say they brought the names of angels from
Babylon. Tobit, who is thought to have resided in Nineveh some time
before the captivity, mentions the angel Raphael, Tob. iii, 17; xi, 2,
7; and Daniel, who lived at Babylon some time after Tobit, has taught us
the names of Michael and Gabriel, Dan. viii, 16; ix, 21; x, 21. In the
New Testament, we find only the two latter mentioned by name.

There are various opinions as to the time when the angels were created.
Some think this took place when our heavens and the earth were made. For
this opinion, however, there is no just foundation in the Mosaic
account. Others think that angels existed long before the formation of
our solar system; and Scripture seems to favour this opinion, Job
xxxviii, 4, 7, where God says, “Where wast thou when I laid the
foundations of the earth?--and all the sons of God shouted for joy.”
Though it be a universal opinion that angels are of a spiritual and
incorporeal nature, yet some of the fathers, misled by a passage in Gen.
vi, 2, where it is said, “The sons of God saw the daughters of men, that
they were fair, and they took them wives of all which they chose,”
imagined them to be corporeal, and capable of sensual pleasures. But,
without noticing all the wild reveries which have been propagated by
bold or ignorant persons, let it suffice to observe, that by “the sons
of God” we are evidently to understand the descendants of Seth, who, for
the great piety wherein they continued for some time, were so called;
and that “the daughters of men” were the progeny of wicked Cain.

As to the doctrine of tutelary or guarding angels, presiding over the
affairs of empires, nations, provinces, and particular persons, though
received by the later Jews, it appears to be wholly Pagan in its origin,
and to have no countenance in the Scriptures. The passages in Daniel
brought to favour this notion are capable of a much better explanation;
and when our Lord declares that the “_angels_” of little children “do
always behold the face of God,” he either speaks of children as being
the objects of the general ministry of angels, or, still more probably,
by _angels_ he there means the disembodied spirits of children; for that
the Jews called disembodied spirits by the name of angels, appears from
Acts xii, 15.

On this question of guardian angels, Bishop Horsley observes: “That the
holy angels are often employed by God in his government of this
sublunary world, is indeed to be clearly proved by holy writ. That they
have power over the matter of the universe, analogous to the powers over
it which men possess, greater in extent, but still limited, is a thing
which might reasonably be supposed, if it were not declared. But it
seems to be confirmed by many passages of holy writ; from which it seems
also evident that they are occasionally, for certain specific purposes,
commissioned to exercise those powers to a prescribed extent. That the
evil angels possessed before their fall the like powers, which they are
still occasionally permitted to exercise for the punishment of wicked
nations, seems also evident. That they have a power over the human
sensory, which they are occasionally permitted to exercise, and by means
of which they may inflict diseases, suggest evil thoughts, and be the
instruments of temptation, must also be admitted. But all this amounts
not to any thing of a discretional authority placed in the hands of
tutelar angels, or to an authority to advise the Lord God with respect
to the measures of his government. Confidently I deny that a single text
is to be found in holy writ, which, rightly understood, gives the least
countenance to the abominable doctrine of such a participation of the
holy angels in God’s government of the world. In what manner then, it
may be asked, are the holy angels made at all subservient to the
purposes of God’s government? This question is answered by St. Paul in
his Epistle to the Hebrews, in the last verse of the first chapter; and
this is the only passage in the whole Bible in which we have any thing
explicit upon the office and employment of angels: ‘Are they not all,’
saith he, ‘ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them that
shall be heirs of salvation?’ They are all, however high in rank and
order, nothing more than ‘ministering spirits,’ or, literally, ‘serving
spirits;’ not invested with authority of their own, but ‘sent forth,’
occasionally sent forth, to do such service as may be required of them,
‘for them that shall be heirs of salvation.’”

The exact number of angels is no where mentioned in Scripture; but it is
always represented as very great. Daniel, vii, 10, says of the Ancient
of Days, “A fiery stream came from before him; thousand thousands
ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before
him.” Jesus Christ says, that his heavenly Father could have given him
more than twelve legions of angels, that is, more than seventy-two
thousand, Matt. xxvi, 53; and the Psalmist declares, that the chariots
of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of angels, lxviii, 17, These
are all intended not to express any exact number, but indefinitely a
very large one.

Though all the angels were created alike good, yet Jude informs us,
verse 6, that some of them “kept not their first estate, but left their
own habitation,” and these God hath “reserved in everlasting chains
under darkness, unto the judgment of the great day.” Speculations on the
cause and occasion of their fall are all vain and trifling. Milton is to
be read on this subject, as on others, not as a divine, but as a poet.
All we know, is, that they are not in their first “estate,” or in their
original place; that this was their own fault, for “they left their own
habitation;” that they are in chains, yet with liberty to tempt; and
that they are reserved to the general judgment.

Dr. Prideaux observes, that the minister of the synagogue, who
officiated in offering the public prayers, being the mouth of the
congregation, delegated by them, as their representative, messenger, or
angel, to address God in prayer for them, was in Hebrew called
_sheliack-zibbor_, that is, the _angel of the church_; and that from
hence the chief ministers of the seven churches of Asia are in the
Revelation, by a name borrowed from the synagogue, called angels of
those churches.

THE ANGEL OF THE LORD, or _the Angel Jehovah_, a title given to Christ
in his different appearances to the patriarchs and others in the Old
Testament.

When the Angel of the Lord found Hagar in the wilderness, “she called
the name of JEHOVAH that spake to her, Thou God seest me.”--JEHOVAH
appeared unto Abraham in the plains of Mamre. Abraham lifted up his
eyes, and three _men_, three persons in human form, “stood by him.” One
of the three is called Jehovah. And JEHOVAH said, “Shall I hide from
Abraham the thing that I do?” Appearances of the same personage occur to
Isaac and to Jacob under the name of “the God of Abraham, and of Isaac.”
After one of these manifestations, Jacob says, “I have seen God face to
face;” and at another, “Surely the Lord (JEHOVAH) is in this place.” The
same Jehovah was made visible to Moses, and gave him his commission; and
God said, “I AM THAT I AM; thou shalt say to the children of Israel, I
AM hath sent me unto you.” The same JEHOVAH went before the Israelites
by day in a pillar of cloud, and by night in a pillar of fire; and by
Him the law was given amidst terrible displays of power and majesty from
Mount Sinai. “I am the Lord (JEHOVAH) thy God, which have brought thee
out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage: Thou shalt have
no other gods before me,” &c. The collation of a few passages, or of the
different parts of the same passages, of Scripture, will show that
Jehovah, and “the Angel of the Lord,” when used in this eminent sense,
are the same person. Jacob says of Bethel, where he had exclaimed,
“Surely _Jehovah_ is in this place;” “The _Angel_ of God appeared to me
in a dream, saying, I am the God of Bethel.” Upon his death bed he gives
the names of _God_ and _Angel_ to this same person: “The _God_ which fed
me all my life long unto this day, the _Angel_ which redeemed me from
all evil, bless the lads.” So in Hosea xii, 2, 5, it is said, “By his
strength he had power with _God_; yea, he had power over the _Angel_,
and prevailed.” “We found him in Bethel, and there he spake with us,
even the _Lord God of Hosts_; the Lord is his memorial.” Here the same
person has the names, _God_, _Angel_, and _Lord God of Hosts_. “The
_Angel of the Lord_ called to Abraham a second time from heaven, and
said, By _myself_ have I sworn, saith the Lord, (JEHOVAH,) that, since
thou hast done this thing, in blessing will I bless thee.” The _Angel of
the Lord_ appeared to Moses in a flame of fire; but this same Angel
“called to him out of the bush, and said, I am the God of thy fathers,
the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; and Moses
hid his face, for he was afraid to look upon God.” To omit many other
passages, St. Stephen, in alluding to this part of the history of Moses,
in his speech before the council, says, “There appeared to Moses in the
wilderness of Mount Sinai, _an Angel of the Lord_ in a flame of fire,”
showing that that phraseology was in use among the Jews in his day, and
that this Angel and Jehovah were regarded as the same being; for he
adds, “Moses was in the church in the wilderness with the _Angel_ which
spoke unto him in Mount Sinai.” There is one part of the history of the
Jews in the wilderness, which so fully shows that they distinguished
this Angel of Jehovah from all created angels, as to deserve particular
attention. In Exodus xxiii, 20, God makes this promise to Moses and the
Israelites: “Behold, I send an Angel before thee to keep thee in the
way, and to bring thee into the place which I have prepared. Beware of
him, and obey his voice; provoke him not; for he will not pardon your
transgressions, for my name is in him.” Of this Angel let it be
observed, that he is here represented as the guide and protector of the
Israelites; to him they were to owe their conquests and their settlement
in the promised land, which are in other places often attributed to the
_immediate_ agency of God; that they are cautioned to “beware of him,”
to reverence and stand in dread of him; that the pardoning of
transgressions belongs to him; finally, “that the _name_ of God was in
him.” This _name_ must be understood of God’s own peculiar name,
JEHOVAH, I AM, which he assumed as his distinctive appellation at his
first appearing to Moses; and as the names of God are indicative of his
nature, he who had a right to bear the peculiar name of God, must also
have his essence. This view is put beyond all doubt by the fact, that
Moses and the Jews so understood the matter; for afterward when their
sins had provoked God to threaten not to go up with them _himself_, but
to commit them to “an angel who should drive out the Canaanite,” &c, the
people mourned over this as a great calamity, and Moses betook himself
to special intercession, and rested not until he obtained the repeal of
the threat, and the renewed promise, “My _presence_ shall go with thee,
and I will give thee rest.” Nothing, therefore, can be more clear than
that Moses and the Israelites considered the promise of the Angel, in
whom was “the name of God,” as a promise that God _himself_ would go
with them. With this uncreated Angel, this _presence_ of the Lord, they
were satisfied, but not with “an angel” indefinitely, who was by
_nature_ of that order of beings usually so called, and therefore a
created being; for at the news of God’s determination not to go up with
them, Moses hastens to the tabernacle to make his intercessions, and
refuses an inferior conductor:--“If thy presence go not with me, carry
us not up hence.”

The Jews held this Word, or Angel of the Lord, to be the future Messiah,
as appears from the writings of their older rabbins. So that he appears
as the Jehovah of all the three dispensations, and yet is invariably
described as a separate person from the unseen Jehovah who sends him. He
was then the Word to be made flesh, and to dwell for a time among us, to
open the way to God by his sacrifice, and to rescue the race, whose
nature he should assume, from sin and death. This he has now actually
effected; and the Patriarchal, Mosaic, and Christian religions are thus
founded upon the same great principles,--the fall and misery of mankind,
and their deliverance by a _Divine Redeemer_.

ANGELICS, worshippers of angels. Those who consider this as a sect of
the Apostolic age, think St. Paul, Coloss. ii, 18, cautions Christians
against a superstitious reverence of these celestial agents of the
Deity, which they conceive to have been borrowed from the idolatrous
reverence paid by the Heathen to genii and demons. The Jews of that time
are also accused of worshipping angels, and probably this superstition
might through them influence the Judaizing members of some of the
Apostolic churches. This idolatry may now be too justly charged upon the
Romish and some other corrupt churches.

ANGER, a resentful emotion of the mind, arising upon the receipt, or
supposed receipt, of an affront or injury; and also simple feeling of
strong displacency at that which is in itself evil, or base, or
injurious to others. In the latter sense it is not only innocent but
commendable. Strong displeasure against evil doers, provided it be free
from hatred and malice, and interferes not with a just placableness, is
also blameless, Eph. iv, 26. When it is vindictive against the person of
our neighbour, or against the innocent creatures of God, it is wicked,
Matt. v, 22. When anger, hatred, wrath, and fury, are ascribed to God,
they denote no tumultuous passion, but merely his holy and just
displeasure with sin and sinners; and the evidence of it in his terrible
threatenings, or righteous judgments, Psalm vi, 1, and vii, 11. We must,
however, take care that we refine not too much. These are Scriptural
terms, and are often used of God; and though they express not a
tumultuous, much less an unjust, passion, there is something in God
which answers to them. In him they are _principles_ arising out of his
holy and just nature; and for this reason they are more steady and
uniform, and more terrible, than if they were emotions, or as we say
passions. Nor can we rightly regard the severity of the judgments which
God has so often executed upon sin without standing in awe of him, “as a
consuming fire” to the ungodly.

ANIMAL, is an organized and living body, endowed with sensation.
Minerals are said to grow or increase, plants to grow and live, and
animals alone to have sensation. The Hebrews distinguished animals into
pure and impure, clean and unclean; or those which might be eaten and
offered, and those whose use was prohibited. The sacrifices which they
offered, were, 1. Of the beeve kind; a cow, bull, or calf. The ox could
not be offered, because it was mutilated; and when it is said oxen were
sacrificed, we are to understand bulls, Lev. xxii, 18, 19. Calmet
thinks, that the mutilation of animals was neither permitted, nor used,
among the Israelites. 2. Of the goat kind; a he-goat, a she-goat, or
kid, Lev. xxii, 24. 3. Of the sheep kind; a ewe, ram, or lamb. When it
is said sheep are offered, rams are chiefly meant, especially in
burnt-offerings and sacrifices for sin; for as to peace-offerings, or
sacrifices of pure devotion, a female might be sometimes offered,
provided it was pure, and without blemish, Lev. iii, 1.

Besides these three sorts of animals, used in sacrifices, many others
might be eaten, wild or tame; as the stag, the roe-buck, and in general
all that have cloven feet, or that chew the cud, Lev. ix, 2, 3, &c. All
that have not cloven hoofs, and do not chew the cud, were esteemed
impure, and could neither be offered nor eaten. The fat of all sorts of
animals sacrificed was forbidden to be eaten. The blood of all kinds of
animals generally, and in all cases, was prohibited on pain of death,
Lev. iii, 17; vii, 23–27. Neither did the Israelites eat animals which
had been taken and touched by a devouring or impure beast, as a dog, a
wolf, a boar, &c, Exodus xxii, 3; nor of any animal that died of itself.
Whoever touched its carcass was impure until the evening; and till that
time, and before he had washed his clothes, he did not return to the
company of other Jews, Lev. xi, 39, 40; xvii, 15; xxii, 8. Fish that had
neither fins nor scales were unclean, Lev. xi, 20. Birds which walk on
the ground with four feet, as bats, and flies that have many feet, were
impure. The law, however, excepts locusts, which have their hind feet
higher than those before, and rather leap than walk. These were clean,
and might be eaten, Lev. xi, 21, 22, as they still are in Palestine. The
distinction between clean and unclean animals has been variously
accounted for. Some have thought it _symbolical_, intended to teach the
avoidance of those evil qualities for which the unclean animals were
remarkable; others, that, in order that the Hebrews might be preserved
from _idolatry_, they were commanded to kill and eat many animals which
were sacred among the Egyptians, and were taught to look with abhorrence
upon others which they reverenced. Others have found a reason in the
unwholesomeness of the flesh of the creatures pronounced by the law to
be unclean, so that they resolve the whole into a _sanative_ regulation.
But it is not to be forgotten that this division of animals into clean
and unclean existed both before the law of Moses, and even prior to the
flood. The foundation of it was therefore clearly _sacrificial_; for
before the deluge it could not have reference to health, since animal
food was not allowed to man prior to the deluge; and as no other ground
for the distinction appears, except that of sacrifice, it must therefore
have had reference to the selection of victims to be solemnly offered to
God, as a part of worship, and as the means of drawing near to him by
expiatory rites for the forgiveness of sins. Some it is true, have
regarded this distinction of clean and unclean beasts as used by Moses
by way of _prolepsis_, or anticipation,--a notion which, if it could not
be refuted by the context, would be perfectly arbitrary. Not only are
the beasts, which Noah was to receive, spoken of as clean and unclean;
but it will be noticed, that, in the command to take them into the ark,
a difference is made in the _number_ to be preserved--the _clean_ being
to be received by _sevens_, and the _unclean_ by _two_ of a kind. This
shows that this distinction among beasts had been established in the
time of Noah; and thus the assumption of a prolepsis is refuted. The
critical attempts which have been made to show that animals were allowed
to man for food, previous to the flood, have wholly failed.

A second argument is furnished by the prohibition of blood for food,
after animals had been granted to man for his sustenance along with the
“herb of the field.” This prohibition is repeated by Moses to the
Israelites, with this explanation:--“I have given it upon the altar to
make _an atonement_ for your souls.” From this it has indeed been
argued, that the doctrine of the atoning power of blood was new, and was
then, for the first time, announced by Moses, or the same reason for the
prohibition would have been given to Noah. To this we may reply, 1. That
unless the same be supposed as the ground of the prohibition of blood to
Noah, as that given by Moses to the Jews, no reason at all can be
conceived for this restraint being put upon the appetite of mankind from
Noah to Moses. 2. That it is a mistake to suppose, that the declaration
of Moses to the Jews, that God had “given them the blood for an
atonement,” is an _additional reason_ for the interdict, not to be found
in the original prohibition to Noah. The whole passage in Lev. xvii, is,
“And thou shalt say to them, Whatsoever man there be of the house of
Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn among you, that eateth any
manner of blood, I will even set my face against that soul that eateth
blood, and I will cut him off from among his people: FOR THE LIFE of the
flesh is in the blood; and I have given it upon the altar, to make
atonement for your souls: _for it is the_ BLOOD (or LIFE) that maketh
atonement for the soul.” The great reason, then, of the prohibition of
blood is, that it is the LIFE; and what follows respecting atonement is
_exegetical_ of this reason; the life is in the blood, and the blood or
life is given as an atonement. Now, by turning to the original
prohibition in Genesis, we find that precisely the same reason is given:
“But the flesh with the blood, which is _the life_ thereof, shall ye not
eat.” The reason, then, being the same, the question is, whether the
exegesis added by Moses must not necessarily be understood in the
general reason given for the restraint to Noah. Blood is prohibited for
this cause, that it is the _life_; and Moses adds, that it is “the
blood,” _or life_, “which makes atonement.” Let any one attempt to
discover any cause for the prohibition of blood to Noah, in the mere
circumstance that it is “the life,” and he will find it impossible. It
is no reason at all, moral or instituted, except that as it was _life_
substituted for _life_, the life of the animal in sacrifice for the life
of man, and that it had a sacred appropriation. The manner, too, in
which Moses introduces the subject is indicative that, although he was
renewing a prohibition, he was not publishing a “new doctrine;” he does
not teach his people that God had then given, or appointed, blood to
make atonement; but he prohibits them from eating it, because he had
made this appointment, without reference to time, and as a subject with
which they were familiar. Because the blood was the life, it was
sprinkled upon, and poured out at, the altar: and we have in the
sacrifice of the paschal lamb, and the sprinkling of its blood, a
sufficient proof, that, before the giving of the law, not only was blood
not eaten, but was appropriated to a sacred sacrificial purpose. Nor was
this confined to the Jews; it was customary with the Romans and Greeks,
who, in like manner, poured out and sprinkled the blood of victims at
their altars, a rite derived, probably, from the Egyptians, as they
derived it, not from Moses, but from the sons of Noah. The notion,
indeed, that the blood of the victims was peculiarly sacred to the gods,
is impressed upon all ancient Pagan mythology.

If, therefore, the distinction of animals into clean and unclean existed
before the flood, and was founded upon the practice of animal sacrifice,
we have not only a proof of the antiquity of that practice, but that it
was of divine institution and appointment, since almighty God gave laws
for its right and acceptable performance. Still farther, if animal
sacrifice was of divine appointment, it must be concluded to be typical
only, and designed to teach the great doctrine of moral atonement, and
to direct faith to the only true sacrifice which could take away the
sins of men;--“the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world,”--the
victim “without spot,” who suffered the just for the unjust, that he
might bring us to God. See SACRIFICES.

ANISE, an annual umbeliferous plant, the seeds of which have an aromatic
smell, a pleasant warm taste, and a carminative quality. But by ἄνηθον,
Matt. xxiii, 23, the _dill_ is meant. Our translators seem to have been
first misled by a resemblance of the sound. No other versions have
fallen into the mistake. The Greek of _anise_ is ἄνισον; but of _dill_,
ἄνηθον.

ANNA, the daughter of Phanuel, a prophetess and widow, of the tribe of
Asher, Luke ii, 36, 37. She was married early, and had lived only seven
years with her husband. Being then disengaged from the ties of marriage,
she thought only of pleasing the Lord; and continued without ceasing in
the temple, serving God night and day, with fasting and prayer, as the
Evangelist expresses it. However, her serving God at the temple night
and day, says Dr. Prideaux, is to be understood no otherwise than that
she constantly attended the morning and evening sacrifice at the temple;
and then with great devotion offered up her prayers to God; the time of
morning and evening sacrifice being the most solemn time of prayer among
the Jews, and the temple the most solemn place for this devotion. Anna
was fourscore years of age when the holy virgin came to present Jesus in
the temple; and entering accidentally, while Simeon was pronouncing his
thanksgiving, she likewise began to praise God, and to speak of the
Messiah to all those who waited for redemption in Jerusalem. We know
nothing more either of the life or death of this holy woman.

ANNAS, or ANANUS, as Josephus calls him, was the son of Seth, and high
priest of the Jews. He succeeded Joazar, the son of Simon, enjoyed the
high priesthood eleven years, and was succeeded by Ishmael, the son of
Phabi. After he was deposed, he still preserved the title of high
priest, and had a great share in the management of public affairs. He is
called high priest in conjunction with Caiaphas, when John the Baptist
entered upon the exercise of his mission; though Calmet thinks that at
that time he did not, strictly speaking, possess or officiate in that
character, Luke iii, 2. On the contrary, Macknight and some others are
of opinion, that at this time Caiaphas was only the deputy of Annas. He
was father-in-law to Caiaphas; and Jesus Christ was carried before him,
directly after his seizure in the garden of Olives, John xviii, 13.
Josephus remarks, that Annas was considered as one of the happiest men
of his nation, for five of his sons were high priests, and he himself
possessed that great dignity many years. This was an instance of good
fortune which, till that time, had happened to no person.

ANOINT, to pour oil upon, Gen. xxviii, 18; xxxi, 13. The setting up of a
stone and anointing it by Jacob, as here recorded, in grateful memory of
his celestial vision, probably became the occasion of idolatry in
succeeding ages, and gave rise to the erection of temples composed of
shapeless masses of unhewn stone, of which so many astonishing remains
are scattered up and down the Asiatic and the European world.

Under the law persons and things set apart for sacred purposes were
anointed with the holy oil; which appears to have been a typical
representation of the communication of the Holy Ghost to Christ and to
his church. See Exod. xxviii, xxix. Hence the Holy Spirit is called an
_unction_ or _anointing_, 1 John ii, 20, 27; and our Lord is called the
“Messiah,” or “Anointed One,” to denote his being called to the offices
of mediator, prophet, priest, and king, to all of which he was
consecrated by the anointing of the Holy Ghost, Matt. iii, 16, 17.

When we hear of the anointing of the Jewish kings, we are to understand
by it the same as their inauguration; inasmuch as anointing was the
principal ceremony on such an occasion, 2 Sam. ii, 4; v, 3. As far as we
are informed, however, unction, as a sign of investiture with the royal
authority, was bestowed only upon Saul and David, and subsequently upon
Solomon and Joash, who ascended the throne under such circumstances,
that there was danger of their right to the succession being forcibly
disputed, 1 Sam. x, 24; 2 Sam. ii, 4; v, 1–3; 1 Chron. xi, 1, 2; 2 Kings
xi, 12–20; 2 Chron. xxiii, 1–21. The ceremony of regal anointing needed
not to be repeated in every instance of succession to the throne,
because the unction which the first one who held the sceptre in any
particular line of princes had received was supposed to suffice for the
succeeding incumbents in the same descent.

In the kingdom of Israel, those who were inducted into the royal office
appear to have been inaugurated with some additional ceremonies, 2 Kings
ix, 13. The private anointings which we learn to have been performed by
the prophets, 2 Kings ix, 3, comp. 1 Sam. x, 1; xvi, 1–13, were only
prophetic symbols or intimations that the persons who were thus anointed
should eventually receive the kingdom.

The holy anointing oil which was made by Moses, Exod. xxx, 22–33, for
the maintaining and consecrating of the king, the high priest, and all
the sacred vessels made use of in the house of God, was one of those
things, as Dr. Prideaux observes, which was wanting in the second
temple. The oil made and consecrated for this use was commanded to be
kept by the children of Israel, throughout their generations, and
therefore it was laid up in the most holy place of the tabernacle and
the first temple.

ANOMŒANS, the name by which the pure Arians were called in the fourth
century, in contradistinction to the Semi-Arians. The word is formed
from the Greek ἀνόμοιος, _different_. For the pure Arians asserted, that
the Son was of a nature different from, and in nothing like, that of the
Father; whereas the Semi-Arians acknowledged a likeness of nature in the
Son, at the same time that they denied, with the pure Arians, the
consubstantiality of the Word. The Semi-Arians condemned the Anomœans
in the council of Seleucia; and the Anomœans, in their turn,
condemned the Semi-Arians in the councils of Constantinople and Antioch,
erasing the word _like_ out of the formula of Rimini and Constantinople.

ANSWER. Beside the common usage of this word, in the sense of a reply,
it has other significations. Moses, having composed a thanksgiving,
after the passage of the Red Sea, Miriam, it is said, _answered_, “Sing
ye to the Lord” &c,--meaning, that Moses, with the men on one side, and
Miriam, with the women on the other side, sung the same song, as it
were, in two choruses, or divisions; of which one _answered_ the other.
Num. xxi, 17, “Then Israel sung this song, Spring up, O well, _answer_
unto it;” that is, sing responsively, one side (or choir) singing first,
and then the other. 1 Sam. xxix, 5, “Is not this David of whom they sung
one to another in dances, saying, Saul hath slain his thousands, and
David his ten thousands?” They sung this song to his honour in distinct
choruses.

This word is taken likewise for, _to accuse_ or to _defend_ any one,
_judicially_. Gen. xxx, 33, “My righteousness shall _answer_ for me;” it
shall be my advocate before thee. Deut. xxxi, 21, “The song which thou
shalt compose and teach them shall _testify_ (answer) against them as a
witness.” Isaiah says, “The show of their countenance will _testify_
(answer) against them;” their impudence will be like a witness and an
accuser. Hosea, v, 5, “The pride of Israel doth _testify_ (answer) to
his face.”

_To answer_, is likewise taken in a bad sense; as when it is said that a
son _answers_ his father insolently, or a servant his master. Rom. ix,
20, “Who art thou that _repliest_ against God?” that is, to contest or
debate with him. John xviii, 22, “Answerest thou the high priest so?”
St. Paul declares that he “had in himself the _answer_ (or sentence) of
death;” 2 Cor. i, 9; like a man who has had notice of condemnation, he
had a certain assurance of dying.

_To answer_ is also used in Scripture for the commencement of a
discourse, when no reply to any question or objection is intended. This
mode of speaking is often used by the evangelists, “And Jesus _answered_
and said.” It is a Hebrew idiom.

ANT, נמלה, in the Turkish and Arabic, _neml_, Prov. vi, 6; xxx, 25. It
is a little insect, famous from all antiquity for its social habits, its
economy, unwearied industry, and prudent foresight. It has afforded a
pattern of commendable frugality to the profuse, and of unceasing
diligence to the slothful. Solomon calls the ants “exceeding wise; for
though a race not strong, yet they prepare their meat in the summer.” He
therefore sends the sluggard to these little creatures, to learn wisdom,
foresight, care, and diligence.

            “Go to the ant; learn of its ways, be wise;
            It early heaps its stores, lest want surprise.
            Skill’d in the various year, the prescient sage
            Beholds the summer chill’d in winter’s rage.
            Survey its arts; in each partition’d cell
            Economy and plenty deign to dwell.”

That the ant hoarded up grains of corn against winter for its
sustenance, was very generally believed by the ancients, though modern
naturalists seem to question the fact. Thus Horace says,

                                “------_Sicut
            Parvula (nam exemplo est) magni formica laboris
            Ore trahit quodcunque potest, atque addit acervo
            Quem struit, haud ignara ac non incauta futuri;
            Quæ, simul inversum contristat aquarius annum,
            Non usquam prorepit, et illis utitur ante
            Quæsitis sapiens._”

                                                  _Sat._ i, l. i, v. 33.

             “For thus the little ant (to human lore
             No mean example) forms her frugal store,
             Gather’d with mighty toil on every side,
             Nor ignorant nor careless to provide
             For future want; yet, when the stars appear
             That darkly sadden the declining year,
             No more she comes abroad, but wisely lives
             On the fair stores industrious summer gives.”

The learned Bochart, in his _Hierozoicon_, has displayed his vast
reading on this subject, and has cited passages from Pliny, Lucian,
Ælian, Zoroaster, Origen, Basil, and Epiphanius, the Jewish rabbins and
Arabian naturalists, all concurring in opinion that ants cut off the
heads of grain, to prevent their germinating; and it is observable that
the Hebrew name of the insect is derived from the verb נמל, which
signifies _to cut off_, and is used for cutting off ears of corn, Job
xxiv, 24.

The following remarks are from “the Introduction to Entomology,” by
Kirby and Spence:

“Till the manners of exotic ants are more accurately explored, it would
be rash to affirm that no ants have magazines of provisions; for,
although, during the cold of our winters in this country, they remain in
a state of torpidity, and have no need of food, yet in warmer regions,
during the rainy seasons, when they are probably confined to their
nests, a store of provisions may be necessary for them. Even in northern
climates, against wet seasons, they may provide in this way for their
sustenance and that of the young brood, which, as Mr. Smeatham observes,
are very voracious, and cannot bear to be long deprived of their food;
else why do ants carry worms, living insects, and many other such
things, into their nests? Solomon’s lesson to the sluggard has been
generally adduced as a strong confirmation of the ancient opinion: it
can, however, only relate to the species of a warm climate, the habits
of which are probably different from those of a cold one; so that his
words, as commonly interpreted, may be perfectly correct and consistent
with nature, and yet be not at all applicable to the species that are
indigenous to Europe.”

The ant, according to the royal preacher, is one of those things which
are little upon the earth, but exceeding _wise_. The superior wisdom of
the ant has been recognised by many writers. Horace in the passage from
which the preceding quotation is taken, praises its sagacity; Virgil
celebrates its foresight, in providing for the wants and infirmities of
old age, while it is young and vigorous:--

              ----_atque inopi metuens formica senectæ._
              [And the ant dreading a destitute old age.]

And we learn from Hesiod, that among the earliest Greeks it was called
Idris, that is, wise, because it foresaw the coming storm, and the
inauspicious day, and collected her store. Cicero believed that the ant
is not only furnished with senses, but also with mind, reason and
memory:--_In formica non modo sensus sed etiam mens, ratio, memoria_.
[The ant possesses not only senses, but also mind, reason, memory.] The
union of so many noble qualities in so small a corpuscle, is indeed one
of the most remarkable phenomena in the works of nature.

ANTHROPOMORPHITES, a sect of ancient heretics, who were so denominated
from two Greek words ἄνθρωπος, _man_, and μόρφη, _shape_. They
understood every thing spoken in Scripture in a literal sense, and
particularly that passage of Genesis in which it is said, “God made man
after his own image.” Hence they maintained, that God had a human shape.

ANTHROPOPATHY, a metaphor by which things belonging to creatures and
especially to man are ascribed to God. Instances of this abound in the
Scriptures, by which they adapt themselves to human modes of speaking,
and to the limited capacities of men. These anthropopathies we must
however interpret in a manner suitable to the majesty of the divine
nature. Thus, when the members of a human body are ascribed to God, we
must understand by them those perfections of which such members in us
are the instruments. The _eye_, for instance, represents God’s knowledge
and watchful care; the _arm_, his power and strength; the _ears_, the
regard he pays to prayer and to the cry of oppression and misery, &c.
Farther, when human affections are attributed to God, we must so
interpret them as to imply no imperfection, such as perturbed feeling in
him. When God is said to repent, the antecedent, by a frequent figure of
speech, is put for the consequent; and in this case we are to understand
an altered mode of proceeding on the part of God, which in man is the
effect of repenting.

ANTICHRIST, compounded of ἀντὶ, _contra_, _against_, and Χριϛὸς,
_Christ_, in a general sense, denotes an adversary of Christ, or one who
denies that the Messiah is come. In this sense, Jews, infidels, &c, may
be said to be _antichrists_. The epithet, in the _general_ sense of it,
is also applicable to any power or person acting in direct opposition to
Christ or his doctrine. Its _particular_ meaning is to be collected from
those passages of Scripture in which it occurs. Accordingly, it may
either signify one who assumes the place and office of Christ, or one
who maintains a direct enmity and opposition to him. The Fathers all
speak of antichrist as a single man; though they also assure us, that he
is to have divers precursors, or forerunners. Yet many Protestant
writers apply to the Romish church, and the pope who is at the head of
it, the several marks and signatures of antichrist enumerated in the
Apocalypse, which would imply antichrist to be, not a single person, but
a corrupt society, or a long series of persecuting pontiffs, or rather,
a certain power and government, that may be held for many generations,
by a number of individuals succeeding one another. The antichrist
mentioned by the Apostle John, first Epistle ii, 18, and more
particularly described in the book of Revelation, seems evidently to be
the same with the _man of sin_, &c, characterized by St. Paul in his
Second Epistle to the Thessalonians, chap. ii; and the whole description
literally applies to the Papal power. A late writer, after collecting
the principal prophecies relating to antichrist, infers from them that a
power, sometimes represented as the little horn, the man of sin, the
antichrist, the beast, the harlot, the star falling from heaven, the
false prophet, the dragon, or as the operation of false teachers, was to
be expected to arise in the Christian world to persecute and oppress,
and delude the disciples of Christ, corrupt the doctrine of the
primitive church, enact new laws, and establish its dominion over the
minds of mankind. He then proceeds to show, from the application of
prophecy to history, and to the remarkable train of events that are now
passing in the world, how exactly Popery, Mohammedanism, and Infidelity,
correspond with the character given in Scripture of the power of
antichrist, which was to prevail a certain time for the especial trial
and punishment of the corrupted church of Christ. Upon this system, the
different opinions of the Protestants and Papists, concerning the power
of antichrist, derived from partial views of the subject, are not wholly
incompatible with each other. With respect to the commonly received
opinion, that the church of Rome is antichrist, Mede and Newton, Daubuz
and Clarke, Lowman and Hurd, Jurieu, Vitringa, and many other members of
the Protestant churches who have written upon the subject, concur in
maintaining, that the prophecies of Daniel, St. Paul, and St. John,
point directly to this church. This was likewise the opinion of the
first reformers; and it was the prevalent opinion of Christians, in the
earliest ages, that antichrist would appear soon after the fall of the
Roman empire. Gregory the Great, in the sixth century, applied the
prophecies concerning the beast in the Revelation, the man of sin, and
the apostasy from the faith mentioned by St. Paul, to him who should
presume to claim the title of universal priest, or universal bishop, in
the Christian church; and yet his immediate successor, Boniface III,
received from the tyrant Phocas the precise title which Gregory had thus
censured. At the synod of Rheims, held in the tenth century, Arnulphus,
bishop of Orleans, appealed to the whole council, whether the bishop of
Rome was not the antichrist of St. Paul, “sitting in the temple of God,”
and perfectly corresponding with the description of him given by St.
Paul. In the eleventh century, all the characters of antichrist seemed
to be so united in the person of Pope Hildebrand, who took the name of
Gregory VII, that Johannes Aventinus, a Romish historian, speaks of it
as a subject in which the generality of fair, candid, and ingenuous
writers agreed, that at that time began the reign of antichrist. And the
Albigenses and Waldenses, who may be called the Protestants of the
twelfth and thirteenth centuries, expressly asserted in their
declarations of faith, that the church of Rome was the whore of Babylon.
The Papists imagine they view in the prophetical picture of antichrist,
imperial Rome, elated by her victories, exulting in her sensuality and
her spoils, polluted by idolatry, persecuting the people of God, and
finally falling like the first Babylon; whilst a new and holy city,
represented by their own communion, filled with the spotless votaries of
the Christian faith, rises out of its ruins, and the victory of the
cross is completed over the temples of Paganism. This scheme has had its
able advocates, at the head of whom may be placed Bossuet, bishop of
Meaux, Grotius, and Hammond. Some writers have maintained, that Caligula
was antichrist; and others have asserted the same of Nero. But in order
to establish the resemblance, they violate the order of time, disregard
the opinions of the primitive Christians, and overlook the appropriate
descriptions of the Apostles. After the point had been maturely debated
at the council of Gap, held in 1603, a resolution was taken thereupon to
insert an article in the confession of faith, whereby the Pope is
formally declared to be antichrist. Pope Clement VIII was stung with
this decision; and even king Henry IV, of France was not a little
mortified, to be thus declared, as he said, an imp of antichrist.

In the book of Daniel it is foretold, that this power should exercise
dominion until a time and times, and the dividing of time, Dan. vii, 25.
This expression is generally admitted to denote 1260 years. The Papal
power was completely established in the year 755, when it obtained the
exarchate of Ravenna. Some, however, date the rise of antichrist in the
year of Christ 606; and Mede places it in 456. If the rise of antichrist
be not reckoned till he was possessed of secular authority, his fall
will happen when this power shall be taken away. If his rise began,
according to Mede in 456, he must have fallen in 1716; if in 606, it
must be in 1866; if in 755, in 2015. If, however, we use prophetical
years, consisting of three hundred and sixty days, and date the rise of
antichrist in the year 755, his fall will happen in the year of Christ
2000. Every thing however in the state of the world betokens a speedy
overthrow of the Papal and Mohammedan powers, both of which have indeed
been already greatly weakened.

ANTI-LIBANUS. The Greeks give this name to that chain of mountains east
of Libanus, which, properly speaking, forms, together with Libanus, but
one ridge of mountains, extending from north to south, and afterward
from south to north, in the shape almost of a horse shoe, for the space
of about fourscore leagues. The western part of these mountains was
called Libanus; the eastern was called Antilibanus; the former reached
along the Mediterranean, from Sidon, almost to Arada, or Symira. The
Hebrew text never mentions Antilibanus; but uses the general name
Libanus: and the coins struck at Laodicea and Hierapolis, have the
inscription, “cities of Libanus,” though they belong rather to
Antilibanus. The Septuagint, on the contrary, puts Antilibanus often
instead of Libanus. The valley which separates Libanus from Antilibanus
is very fruitful: it was formerly, on the side of Syria, inclosed with a
wall, whereof there are now no traces. Strabo says, that the name of
Cœlo-Syria, or “the hollow Syria,” belongs principally to the valley
between Libanus and Antilibanus.

ANTINOMIANS are those who maintain that the law is of no use or
obligation under the Gospel dispensation, or who hold doctrines that
clearly supersede the necessity of good works and a virtuous life. The
Antinomians took their origin from John Agricola, about the year 1538,
who taught that the law was in no wise necessary under the Gospel; that
good works do not promote our salvation, nor ill ones hinder it; that
repentance is not to be preached from the decalogue, but only from the
Gospel. This sect sprung up in England during the protectorate of Oliver
Cromwell; and extended their system of libertinism much farther than
Agricola, the disciple of Luther. Some of their teachers expressly
maintained, that as the elect cannot fall from grace nor forfeit the
divine favour, the wicked actions they commit are not really sinful, nor
are to be considered as instances of their violation of the divine law;
and that consequently they have no occasion either to confess their
sins, or to break them off by repentance. According to them, it is one
of the essential and distinctive characters of the elect, that they
cannot do any thing which is displeasing to God. Luther, Rutherford,
Schlusselburgh, Sedgwick, Gataker, Witsius, Bull, Williams, &c, have
written refutations; Crisp, Richardson, Saltmarsh, &c, defences, of the
Antinomians; Wigandus, a comparison between ancient and modern
Antinomians.

The doctrine of Agricola was in itself obscure, and is thought to have
been represented worse than it really was by Luther, who wrote against
him with acrimony, and first styled him and his followers Antinomians.
Agricola, in defending himself, complained that opinions were imputed to
him which he did not hold. The writings of Dr. Crisp in the seventeenth
century are considered as highly favourable to Antinomianism, though he
acknowledges that, “in respect of the rules of righteousness, or the
matter of obedience, we are under the law still, or else,” as he adds,
“we are lawless, to live every man as seems good in his own eyes, which
no true Christian dares so much as think of.” The following sentiments,
however, among others, are taught in his sermons: “The law is cruel and
tyrannical, requiring what is naturally impossible.” “The sins of the
elect were so imputed to Christ, as that though he did not commit them,
yet they became actually his transgressions, and ceased to be theirs.”
“The feelings of conscience, which tell them that sin is theirs, arise
from a want of knowing the truth.” “It is but the voice of a lying
spirit in the hearts of believers, that saith they have yet sin wasting
their consciences, and lying as a burden too heavy for them to bear.”
“Christ’s righteousness is so imputed to the elect, that they, ceasing
to be sinners, are as righteous as he was, and all that he was.” “An
elect person is not in a condemned state while an unbeliever; and should
he happen to die before God call him to believe, he would not be lost.”
“Repentance and confession of sin are not necessary to forgiveness. A
believer may certainly conclude before confession, yea, as soon as he
hath committed sin, the interest he hath in Christ, and the love of
Christ embracing him.” These dangerous sentiments, and others of a
similar bearing, have been fully answered by many writers; but by none
more ably than by the Rev. John Fletcher, in his “Checks to
Antinomianism.”

ANTIOCH, a city of Upper Syria, on the river Orontes, about twenty miles
from the place where it discharges itself into the Mediterranean. It was
built by Seleucus Nicanor, about three hundred years before Christ; and
became the seat of empire of the Syrian kings of the Macedonian race,
and afterward of the Roman governors of the eastern provinces; being
very centrally and commodiously situated midway between Constantinople
and Alexandria, about seven hundred miles from each, in 37° 17´ north
latitude, and 36° 45´ east longitude. No city perhaps, Jerusalem
excepted, has experienced more frequent revolutions, or suffered more
numerous and dire calamities, than Antioch; as, besides the common
plagues of eastern cities, pestilence, famine, fire, and sword, it has
several times been entirely overthrown by earthquakes.

In 362, the emperor Julian spent some months at Antioch; which were
chiefly occupied in his favourite object of reviving the mythology of
Paganism. The grove at Daphne, planted by Seleucus, which, with its
temple and oracle, presented, during the reigns of the Macedonian kings
of Syria, the most splendid and fashionable place of resort for Pagan
worship in the east, had sunk into neglect since the establishment of
Christianity. The altar of the god was deserted, the oracle was
silenced, and the sacred grove itself defiled by the interment of
Christians. Julian undertook to restore the ancient honours and usages
of the place; but it was first necessary to take away the pollution
occasioned by the dead bodies of the Christians, which were disinterred
and removed! Among these was that of Babylas, a bishop of Antioch, who
died in prison in the persecution of Decius, and after resting near a
century in his grave within the walls of Antioch, had been removed by
order of Gallus into the midst of the grove of Daphne, where a church
was built over him; the remains of the Christian saint effectually
supplanting the former divinity of the place, whose temple and statue,
however, though neglected, remained uninjured. The Christians of
Antioch, undaunted by the conspiracy against their religion, or the
presence of the emperor himself, conveyed the relics of their former
bishop in triumph back to their ancient repository within the city. The
immense multitude who joined in the procession, chanted forth their
execrations against idols and idolaters; and on the same night the image
and the temple of the Heathen god were consumed by the flames. A
dreadful vengeance might be expected to have followed these scenes; but
the real or affected clemency of Julian contented itself with shutting
up the cathedral, and confiscating its wealth. Many Christians, indeed,
suffered from the zeal of the Pagans; but, as it would appear, without
the sanction of the emperor.

In 1268, Antioch was taken by Bibars, or Bondocdar, sultan of Egypt. The
slaughter of seventeen thousand, and the captivity of one hundred
thousand of its inhabitants, mark the final siege and fall of Antioch;
which, while they close the long catalogue of its public woes, attest
its extent and population. From this time it remained in a ruinous and
nearly deserted condition, till, with the rest of Syria, it passed into
the hands of the Ottoman Turks, with whose empire it has ever since been
incorporated.

To distinguish it from other cities of the same name, the capital of
Syria was called _Antiochia apud Daphnem_, or Antioch near Daphne, a
village in the neighbourhood, where was a temple dedicated to the
goddess of that name; though, in truth, the chief deity of the place was
Apollo, under the fable of his amorous pursuit of the nymph Daphne; and
the worship was worthy of its object. The temple stood in the midst of a
grove of laurels and cypresses, where every thing was assembled which
could minister to the senses; and in whose recesses the juvenile devotee
wanted not the countenance of a libertine god to abandon himself to
voluptuousness. Even those of riper years and graver morals could not
with safety breathe the atmosphere of a place where pleasure, assuming
the character of religion, roused the dormant passions, and subdued the
firmness of virtuous resolution. Such being the source, the stream could
scarcely be expected to be more pure; in fact, the citizens of Antioch
were distinguished only for their luxury in life and licentiousness in
manners. This was an unpromising soil for Christianity to take root in.
But here, nevertheless, it was planted at an early period, and
flourished vigorously. It should be observed, that the inhabitants of
Antioch were partly Syrians, and partly Greeks; chiefly, perhaps, the
latter, who were invited to the new city by Seleucus. To these Greeks,
in particular, certain Cypriot and Cyrenian converts, who had fled from
the persecution which followed the death of Stephen, addressed
themselves; “and a great number believed, and turned unto the Lord.”
When the heads of the church at Jerusalem were informed of this success,
they sent Barnabas to Antioch, who encouraged the new disciples, and
added many to their number; and finding how great were both the field
and the harvest, went to Tarsus to solicit the assistance of Paul. Both
this Apostle and Barnabas then taught conjointly at Antioch; and great
numbers were, by their labours during a whole year, added to the rising
church, Acts xi, 19–26; xv, 22–35. Here they were also joined by Peter,
who was reproved by Paul for his dissimulation, and his concession to
the Jews respecting the observance of the law, Gal. ii, 11–14.

Antioch was the birthplace of St. Luke and Theophilus, and the see of
the martyr Ignatius. In this city the followers of Christ had first the
name of Christians given them. We have the testimony of Chrysostom, both
of the vast increase of this illustrious church in the fourth century,
and of the spirit of charity which continued to actuate it. It consisted
at this time of not less than a hundred thousand persons, three thousand
of whom were supported out of the public donations. It is painful to
trace the progress of declension in such a church as this. But the
period now referred to, namely, the age of Chrysostom, toward the close
of the fourth century, may be considered as the brightest of its history
subsequent to the Apostolic age, and that from which the church at
Antioch may date its fall. It continued, indeed, outwardly prosperous;
but superstition, secular ambition, the pride of life; pomp and
formality in the service of God, in place of humility and sincere
devotion; the growth of faction, and the decay of charity; showed that
real religion was fast disappearing, and that the foundations were laid
of that great apostasy which, in two centuries from this time,
overspread the whole Christian world, led to the entire extinction of
the church in the east, and still holds dominion over the fairest
portions of the west.

Antioch, under its modern name of Antakia, is now but little known to
the western nations. It occupies, or rather did till lately occupy, a
remote corner of the ancient enclosure of its walls. Its splendid
buildings were reduced to hovels; and its population of half a million,
to ten thousand wretched beings, living in the usual debasement and
insecurity of Turkish subjects. Such was nearly its condition when
visited by Pocock about the year 1738, and again by Kinneir in 1813. But
its ancient subterranean enemy, which, since its destruction in 587,
never long together withheld its assaults, has again triumphed over it:
the earthquake of the 13th of August, 1822, laid it once more in ruins;
and every thing relating to Antioch is past.

ANTIOCH, of Pisidia. Beside the Syrian capital, there was another
Antioch visited by St. Paul when in Asia, and called, for the sake of
distinction, _Antiochia ad Pisidiam_, as belonging to that province, of
which it was the capital. Here Paul and Barnabas preached; but the Jews,
jealous, as usual, of the reception of the Gospel by the Gentiles,
raised a sedition against them, and obliged them to leave the city, Acts
xiii, 14, to the end. There were several other cities of the same name,
sixteen in number, in Syria and Asia Minor, built by the Seleucidæ, the
successors of Alexander in these countries; but the above two are the
only ones which it is necessary to describe as occurring in Scripture.

ANTIOCHUS. There were many kings of this name in Syria, much celebrated
in the Greek, Roman, and Jewish histories, after the time of Seleucus
Nicanor, the father of Antiochus Soter, and reckoned the first king of
Syria, after Alexander the Great.

1. ANTIOCHUS SOTER was the son of Seleucus Nicanor, and obtained the
surname of Soter, or Saviour, from having hindered the invasion of Asia
by the Gauls. Some think that it was on the following occasion: The
Galatians having marched to attack the Jews in Babylon, whose army
consisted only of eight thousand men, reinforced with four thousand
Macedonians, the Jews defended themselves with so much bravery, that
they killed one hundred and twenty thousand men, 2 Mac. viii, 20. It was
perhaps, too, on this occasion, that Antiochus Soter made the Jews of
Asia free of the cities belonging to the Gentiles, and permitted them to
live according to their own laws.

2. ANTIOCHUS THEOS, or, the God, was the son and successor of Antiochus
Soter. He married Berenice, daughter of Ptolemy Philadelphus, king of
Egypt. Laodice, his first wife, seeing herself despised, poisoned
Antiochus, Berenice, and their son, who was intended to succeed in the
kingdom. After this, Laodice procured Seleucus Callinicus, her son by
Antiochus, to be acknowledged king of Syria. These events were foretold
by Daniel: “And in the end of years,” the king of Egypt, or of the
south, and the king of Syria, or of the north, “shall join themselves
together; for the king’s daughter of the south shall come to the king of
the north to make an agreement: but she shall not retain the power of
the arm; neither shall he stand, nor his arm: but she shall be given up,
and they that brought her, and he that begat her, and he that
strengthened her in these times,” Dan. xi, 6.

3. ANTIOCHUS THE GREAT was the son of Seleucus Callinicus, and brother
to Seleucus Ceraunus, whom he succeeded in the year of the world 3781,
and before Jesus Christ 223. He made war against Ptolemy Philopator,
king of Egypt, but was defeated near Raphia, 3 Mac. i. Thirteen years
after, Ptolemy Philopator being dead, Antiochus resolved to become
master of Egypt. He immediately seized Cœlo-Syria, Phenicia, and
Judea; but Scopas, general of the Egyptian army, entered Judea while
Antiochus was occupied by the war against Attalus, and retook those
places. However, he soon lost them again to Antiochus. On this occasion
happened what Josephus relates of this prince’s journey to Jerusalem.
After a victory which he had obtained over Scopas, near the springs of
Jordan, he became master of the strong places in Cœlo-Syria and
Samaria; and the Jews submitted freely to him, received him into their
city and furnished his army plentifully with provisions. In reward for
their affection, Antiochus granted them, according to Josephus, twenty
thousand pieces of silver, to purchase beasts for sacrifice, one
thousand four hundred and sixty measures of meal, and three hundred and
seventy-five measures of salt to be offered with the sacrifices, and
timber to rebuild the porches of the Lord’s house. He exempted the
senators, scribes, and singing men of the temple, from the capitation
tax; and he permitted the Jews to live according to their own laws in
every part of his dominions. He also remitted the third part of their
tribute, to indemnify them for their losses in the war; he forbade the
Heathens to enter the temple without being purified, and to bring into
the city the flesh of mules, asses, and horses to sell, under a severe
penalty.

In the year of the world 3815, Antiochus was overcome by the Romans, and
obliged to cede all his possessions beyond Mount Taurus, to give twenty
hostages, among whom was his own son Antiochus, afterward surnamed
Epiphanes, and to pay a tribute of twelve thousand Euboic talents, each
fourteen Roman pounds in weight. To defray these charges, he resolved to
seize the treasures of the temple of Belus, at Elymais; but the people
of that country, informed of his design, surprised and destroyed him,
with all his army, in the year of the world 3817, and before Jesus
Christ 187. He left two sons, Seleucus Philopator, and Antiochus
Epiphanes, who succeeded him.

4. ANTIOCHUS EPIPHANES, the son of Antiochus the Great, having continued
a hostage at Rome fourteen years, his brother Seleucus resolved to
procure his return to Syria, and sent his own son Demetrius to Rome in
the place of Antiochus. Whilst Antiochus was on his journey to Syria,
Seleucus died, in the year of the world 3829. When, therefore, Antiochus
landed, the people received him as some propitious deity come to assume
the government, and to oppose the enterprises of Ptolemy, king of Egypt,
who threatened to invade Syria. For this reason Antiochus obtained the
surname of Epiphanes, the illustrious, or of one appearing like a god.

Antiochus quickly turned his attention to the possession of Egypt, which
was then enjoyed by Ptolemy Philometor, his nephew, son to his sister
Cleopatra, whom Antiochus the Great had married to Ptolemy Epiphanes,
king of Egypt. He sent Apollonius, one of his officers, into Egypt,
apparently to honour Ptolemy’s coronation, but in reality to obtain
intelligence whether the great men of the kingdom were inclined to place
the government of Egypt in his hands during the minority of the king his
nephew, 2 Mac. iv, 21, &c. Apollonius, however, found them not disposed
to favour his master; and this obliged Antiochus to make war against
Philometor. He came to Jerusalem in 3831, and was received there by
Jason, to whom he had sold the high priesthood. He designed to attack
Egypt, but returned without effecting any thing. The ambition of those
Jews who sought the high priesthood, and bought it of Antiochus, was the
beginning of those calamities which overwhelmed their nation under this
prince. Jason procured himself to be constituted in this dignity in the
stead of Onias III; but Menelaus offering a greater price, Jason was
deprived, and Menelaus appointed in his place. These usurpers of the
high priesthood, to gratify the Syrians, assumed the manners of the
Greeks, their games and exercises, and neglected the worship of the
Lord, and the temple service.

War broke out between Antiochus Epiphanes and Ptolemy Philometor.
Antiochus entered Egypt in the year of the world 3833, and reduced
almost the whole of it to his obedience, 2 Mac. v, 3–5. The next year he
returned; and whilst he was engaged in the siege of Alexandria, a false
report was spread of his death. The inhabitants of Jerusalem testifying
their joy at this news, Antiochus, when returning from Egypt, entered
this city by force, treated the Jews as rebels, and commanded his troops
to slay all they met. Eighty thousand were killed, made captives, or
sold on this occasion. Antiochus, conducted by the corrupt high priest
Menelaus, entered into the holy of holies, whence he took and carried
off the most precious vessels of that holy place, to the value of one
thousand eight hundred talents. In the year 3835, Antiochus made a third
expedition against Egypt, which he entirely subdued. The year following,
he sent Apollonius into Judea, with an army of twenty-two thousand men,
and commanded him to kill all the Jews who were of full age, and to sell
the women and young men, 2 Mac. v, 24, 25. These orders were too
punctually executed. It was on this occasion that Judas Maccabæus
retired into the wilderness with his father and his brethren, 2 Mac. v,
29. These misfortunes were only preludes of what they were to suffer;
for Antiochus, apprehending that the Jews would never be constant in
their obedience to him, unless he obliged them to change their religion,
and to embrace that of the Greeks, issued an edict, enjoining them to
conform to the laws of other nations, and forbidding their usual
sacrifices in the temple, their festivals, and their Sabbath. The statue
of Jupiter Olympus was placed upon the altar of the temple, and thus the
abomination of desolation was seen in the temple of God. Many corrupt
Jews complied with these orders; but others resisted them. Mattathias
and his sons retired to the mountains. Old Eleazar, and the seven
brethren, suffered death with great courage at Antioch, 2 Mac. vii.
Mattathias being dead, Judas Maccabæus headed those Jews who continued
faithful, and opposed with success the generals whom king Antiochus sent
into Judea. The king, informed of the valour and resistance of Judas,
sent new forces; and, finding his treasures exhausted, he resolved to go
into Persia to levy tributes, and to collect large sums which he had
agreed to pay to the Romans, 1 Mac. iii, 5–31; 2 Mac. ix, 1, &c; 1 Mac.
vi, 1, &c. Knowing that very great riches were lodged in the temple of
Elymaïs, he determined to carry it off; but the inhabitants of the
country made so vigorous a resistance, that he was forced to retreat
toward Babylonia. When he was come to Ecbatana, he was informed of the
defeat of Nicanor and Timotheus, and that Judas Maccabæus had retaken
the temple of Jerusalem, and restored the worship of the Lord, and the
usual sacrifices. On receiving this intelligence, the king was
transported with indignation; and, threatening to make Jerusalem a grave
for the Jews, commanded the driver of his chariot to urge the horses
forward, and to hasten his journey. However, divine vengeance soon
overtook him: he fell from his chariot, and bruised all his limbs. He
was also tormented with such pains in his bowels, as allowed him no
rest; and his disease was aggravated by grief and vexation. In this
condition he wrote to the Jews very humbly, promised them many things,
and engaged even to turn Jew, if God would restore him to health. He
earnestly recommended to them his son Antiochus, who was to succeed him,
and entreated them to favour the young prince, and to continue faithful
to him. He died, overwhelmed with pain and grief, in the mountains of
Paratacene, in the little town of Tabes, in the year of the world 3840,
and before Jesus Christ 164.

5. ANTIOCHUS EUPATOR, son of Antiochus Epiphanes, was only nine years
old when his father died and left him the kingdom of Syria. Lysias, who
governed the kingdom in the name of the young prince, led against Judea
an army of one hundred thousand foot, twenty thousand horse, and thirty
elephants, 1 Mac. vi; 2 Mac. xiii. He besieged and took the fortress of
Bethsura, and thence marched against Jerusalem. The city was ready to
fall into his hands when Lysias received the news that Philip, whom
Antiochus Epiphanes had entrusted with the regency of the kingdom, had
come to Antioch to take the government, according to the disposition of
the late king. He therefore proposed an accommodation with the Jews,
that he might return speedily to Antioch and oppose Philip. After
concluding a peace, he immediately returned into Syria, with the young
king and his army.

In the meantime, Demetrius Soter, son of Seleucus Philopator, and nephew
to Antiochus Epiphanes, to whom by right the kingdom belonged, having
escaped from Rome, came into Syria. Finding the people disposed for
revolt, Demetrius headed an army, and marched directly to Antioch,
against Antiochus and Lysias. However, the inhabitants did not wait till
he besieged the city; but opened the gates, and delivered to him Lysias
and the young king Antiochus Eupator, whom Demetrius caused to be put to
death, without suffering them to appear in his presence. Antiochus
Eupator reigned only two years, and died in the year of the world 3842,
and before Jesus Christ 162.

6. ANTIOCHUS THEOS, or the _Divine_, the son of Alexander Balas, king of
Syria, was brought up by the Arabian prince Elmachuel, or, as he is
called in the Greek, Simalcue, 1 Mac. xi, 39, 40, &c. Demetrius Nicanor,
king of Syria, having rendered himself odious to his troops, one
Diodotus, otherwise called Tryphon, came to Zabdiel, a king in Arabia,
and desired him to entrust him with young Antiochus, whom he promised to
place on the throne of Syria, which was then possessed by Demetrius
Nicanor. After some hesitation, Zabdiel complied with the request; and
Tryphon carried Antiochus into Syria, and put the crown on his head. The
troops dismissed by Demetrius, came and joined Tryphon, who, having
formed a powerful army, defeated Demetrius, and forced him to retreat to
Seleucia. Tryphon seized his elephants, and rendered himself master of
Antioch, in the year of the world 3859, and before Jesus Christ 145.
Antiochus Theos, to strengthen himself in his new acquisition, sent
letters to Jonathan Maccabæus, high priest and prince of the Jews,
confirming him in the high priesthood, and granting him four toparchies,
or four considerable places, in Judea. He also received Jonathan into
the number of his friends, sent him vessels of gold, permitted him to
use a gold cup, to wear purple, and a golden buckle; and he gave his
brother, Simon Maccabæus, the command of all his troops on the coast of
the Mediterranean, from Tyre to Egypt. Jonathan, engaged by so many
favours, declared resolutely for Antiochus, or rather for Tryphon, who
reigned under the name of this young prince; and on several occasions,
he attacked the generals of Demetrius, who still possessed many places
beyond Jordan and in Galilee, 1 Macc. xi, 63, &c; xii, 24, 34. Tryphon,
seeing young Antiochus in peaceable possession of the kingdom of Syria,
resolved to usurp his crown. He thought it necessary, in the first
place, to secure Jonathan Maccabæus who was one of the most powerful
supporters of Antiochus’s throne. He came, therefore, with troops into
Judea, invited Jonathan to Ptolemais, and there, on frivolous pretences,
made him prisoner. However, Simon, Jonathan’s brother, headed the troops
of Judea, and opposed Tryphon, who intended to take Jerusalem. Tryphon,
being disappointed, put Jonathan to death at Bassa or Bascama, and
returned into Syria, where, without delay, he executed his design of
killing Antiochus. He corrupted the royal physicians, who, having
published that Antiochus was tormented with the stone, murdered him, by
cutting him without any necessity. Thus Tryphon was left master of
Syria, in the year of the world 3861, and before Jesus Christ 143.

7. ANTIOCHUS SIDETES, or _Soter_ the Saviour, or _Eusebes_ the pious,
was the son of Demetrius Soter, and brother to Demetrius Nicanor.
Tryphon, the usurper of the kingdom of Syria, having rendered himself
odious to his troops, they deserted him, and offered their services to
Cleopatra, the wife of Demetrius Nicanor. She lived in the city of
Seleucia, shut up with her children, while her husband Demetrius was a
prisoner in Persia, where he had married Rodeguna, the daughter of
Arsaces king of Persia. Cleopatra, therefore sent to Antiochus Sidetes,
her brother-in-law, and offered him the crown of Syria, if he would
marry her; to which Antiochus consented. This prince was then at Cnidus,
where his father, Demetrius Soter had placed him with one of his
friends. He came into Syria, and wrote to Simon Maccabæus, to engage him
against Tryphon, 1 Macc. xv, 1, 2, 3, &c. He confirmed the privileges
which the kings of Syria had granted to Simon, permitted him to coin
money with his own stamp, declared Jerusalem and the temple exempt from
royal jurisdiction, and promised other favours as soon as he should
obtain peaceable possession of the kingdom which had belonged to his
ancestors. Antiochus Sidetes having married his sister-in-law,
Cleopatra, in the year of the world 3865, the troops of Tryphon resorted
to him in crowds. Tryphon, thus abandoned, retired to Dora, in
Phœnicia, whither Antiochus pursued him with an army of 120,000 foot,
800 horse, and a powerful fleet. Simon Maccabæus sent Antiochus two
thousand chosen men, but the latter refused them and revoked all his
promises. He also sent Athenobius to Jerusalem to oblige Simon to
restore to him Gazara and Joppa, with the citadel of Jerusalem; and to
demand of him five hundred talents more, as reparation for injuries the
king had suffered, and as tribute for his own cities. At the same time
he threatened to make war upon him, if he did not comply. Simon showed
Athenobius all the lustre of his wealth and power, told him he had in
his possession no place which belonged to Antiochus, and said that the
cities of Gazara and Joppa had greatly injured his people, and he would
give the king for the property of them one hundred talents. Athenobius
returned with great indignation to Antiochus, who was extremely offended
at Simon’s answer. In the meantime, Tryphon having escaped privately
from Dora, embarked in a vessel and fled. Antiochus pursued him, and
sent Cendebeus with troops into the maritime parts of Palestine, and
commanded him to rebuild Cedron, and fight the Jews. John Hircanus, son
of Simon Maccabæus, was then at Gaza, and gave notice to his father of
the coming of Cendebeus. Simon furnished his sons, John Hircanus and
Judas with troops, and sent them against Cendebeus, whom they routed in
the plain and pursued to Azotus.

Antiochus followed Tryphon, till he forced him to kill himself in the
year of the world 3869. After this, Antiochus thought only of reducing
to his obedience those cities which, in the beginning of his father’s
reign, had shaken off their subjection. Simon Maccabæus, prince and high
priest of the Jews, being treacherously murdered by Ptolemy, his
son-in-law, in the castle of Docus, near Jericho, the murderer
immediately sent to Antiochus Sidetes to demand troops, that he might
recover for him the country and cities of the Jews. Antiochus came in
person with an army, and besieged Jerusalem, which was bravely defended
by John Hircanus. The siege was long protracted; and the king divided
his army into seven parts, and guarded all the avenues of the city. It
being the time for celebrating the feast of tabernacles, the Jews
desired of Antiochus a truce for seven days. The king not only granted
this request, but sent them bulls with gilded horns, and vessels of gold
and silver filled with incense, to be offered in the temple. He also
ordered such provisions as they wanted, to be given to the Jewish
soldiers. This courtesy of the king so won the hearts of the Jews, that
they sent ambassadors to treat of peace, and to desire that they might
live according to their own laws. Antiochus required that they should
surrender their arms, demolish the city walls, pay tribute for Joppa and
the other cities they possessed out of Judea, and receive a garrison
into Jerusalem. To these conditions, except the last, the Jews
consented; for they could not be induced to see an army of strangers in
their capital, and chose rather to give hostages and five hundred
talents of silver. The king entered the city, beat down the breast work
above the walls, and returned to Syria, in the year of the world 3870,
and before Jesus Christ 134. Three years after, Antiochus marched
against the Persians, or Parthians, and demanded the liberty of his
brother Demetrius Nicanor, who had been made prisoner long before by
Arsaces, and was detained for the purpose of being employed in exciting
a war against Antiochus. This war, therefore, Antiochus thought proper
to prevent. With an army of eighty thousand, or, as Orosius says, of one
hundred thousand men, he marched toward Persia, and no sooner appeared
on the frontiers of that country, than several eastern princes,
detesting the pride and avarice of the Persians, came and surrendered.
Antiochus defeated his enemies in three engagements, and took Babylon.
He was accompanied in these expeditions by John Hircanus, high priest of
the Jews, who, it is supposed, obtained the surname of Hircanus from
some gallant action which he performed.

As the army of Antiochus was too numerous to continue assembled in any
one place, he was obliged to divide it, to put it into winter quarters.
These troops behaved with so much insolence, that they alienated the
minds of all men. The cities in which they were, privately surrendered
to the Persians; and all resolved to attack, in one day, the garrisons
they contained, that the troops being separated might not assist each
other. Antiochus at Babylon obtained intelligence of this design, and,
with the few soldiers about him, endeavoured to succour his people. He
was attacked in the way by Phraates, king of Persia, whom he fought with
great bravery; but being at length deserted by his own forces, according
to the generality of historians, he was overpowered and killed by the
Persians or Parthians. Appian, however, says that he killed himself, and
Ælian, that he threw himself headlong from a precipice. This event took
place in the year of the world 3874, and before Jesus Christ 130. After
the death of Sidetes, Demetrius Nicanor, or Nicetor, reascended the
throne of Syria.

ANTIPÆDOBAPTISTS, a denomination given to those who object to the
baptism of infants. The word is derived from ἀντὶ, _against_, ϖᾶις,
ϖαιδὸς, _a child_, βαπτίζω, _I baptize_. See BAPTISM.

ANTIPAS, Antipas-Herod, or Herod-Antipas, was the son of Herod the
Great, and Cleopatra of Jerusalem. Herod the Great, in his first will,
declared him his successor in the kingdom; but he afterward named his
son Archelaus king of Judea, and gave to Antipas only the title of
tetrarch of Galilee and Peræa. Archelaus going to Rome, to persuade the
emperor to confirm his father’s will, Antipas also went thither. The
emperor bestowed on Archelaus one moity of what had been assigned him by
Herod, with the quality of ethnarch, and promised to grant him the title
of king when he had shown himself deserving of it by his virtues. To
Antipas, Augustus gave Galilee and Peræa; and to Philip, Herod’s other
son, the Batanæa, Trachonitis, and Auranitis, with some other places.

Antipas, returning to Judea, took great pains in adorning and fortifying
the principal places of his dominions. He married the daughter of
Aretas, king of Arabia, whom he divorced about A. D. 33, that he might
marry his sister-in-law, Herodias, the wife of his brother Philip, who
was still living. John the Baptist, exclaiming against this incest, was
seized by order of Antipas, and imprisoned in the castle of Machærus.
Josephus says, that Antipas caused John to be taken, because he drew too
great a concourse after him; and Antipas was afraid he should use his
influence over the people to induce them to revolt. But Josephus has
reported the pretence for the true cause. The evangelists, who were
better informed than Josephus, as being 



[Illustration]

                           PERCY'S RELIQUES.

[Illustration]




                              RELIQUES OF

                            ANCIENT ENGLISH
                                POETRY

              CONSISTING OF OLD HEROIC BALLADS, SONGS AND
                   OTHER PIECES OF OUR EARLIER POETS
                        TOGETHER WITH SOME FEW
                             OF LATER DATE


                                  BY

                          THOMAS PERCY, D.D.

                           BISHOP OF DROMORE

            EDITED, WITH A GENERAL INTRODUCTION, ADDITIONAL
                    PREFACES, NOTES, GLOSSARY, ETC.

                                  BY

                       HENRY B. WHEATLEY, F.S.A.


                           IN THREE VOLUMES
                               VOL. III


                   LONDON: GEORGE ALLEN & UNWIN LTD.
                             RUSKIN HOUSE
                        40 MUSEUM STREET, W.C.1

  First Published by Swan Sonnenschein      _April_                 1885
  Reprinted                                 _August_                1891
      "                                     _August_                1899
      "                                     _December_              1909
      "                                     _January_               1927

           PRINTED BY THE RIVERSIDE PRESS LIMITED, EDINBURGH
                             GREAT BRITAIN

[Illustration]




CONTENTS OF VOLUME THE THIRD


                            BOOK THE FIRST.

                     (_Poems on King Arthur, &c._)

                                                                    Page


   1.  The Boy and the Mantle                                          3

   2.  The Marriage of Sir Gawaine                                    13

   3.  King Ryence's Challenge                                        24

   4.  King Arthur's Death. A Fragment                                27

       Copy from the Folio MS.                                        35

   5.  The Legend of King Arthur                                      39

   6.  A Dyttie to Hey Downe                                          44

   7.  Glasgerion                                                     45

   8.  Old Robin of Portingale                                        50

   9.  Child Waters                                                   58

  10.  Phillida and Corydon. By Nicholas Breton                       66

  11.  Little Musgrave and Lady Barnard                               68

  12.  The Ew-bughts, Marion. A Scottish Song                         74

  13.  The Knight, and Shepherd's Daughter                            76

  14.  The Shepherd's Address to his Muse. By N Breton                80

  15.  Lord Thomas and Fair Ellinor                                   82

  16.  Cupid and Campaspe. By John Lilye                              85

  17.  The Lady turned Serving-man                                    86

  18.  Gil [Child] Morrice. A Scottish Ballad                         91

       Copy from the Folio MS.                                       100


                           BOOK THE SECOND.

   1.  The Legend of Sir Guy                                         107

   2.  Guy and Amarant. By Samuel Rowlands                           114

   3.  The Auld Good-Man. A Scottish Song                            122

   4.  Fair Margaret and Sweet William                               124

   5.  Barbara Allen's Cruelty                                       128

   6.  Sweet William's Ghost. A Scottish Ballad                      130

   7.  Sir John Grehme and Barbara Allen. A Scottish Ballad          133

   8.  The Bailiff's Daughter of Islington                           135

   9.  The Willow Tree. A Pastoral Dialogue                          137

  10.  The Lady's Fall                                               139

  11.  Waly, Waly, Love be bonny. A Scottish Song                    145

  12.  The Bride's Burial                                            148

  13.  Dulcina                                                       153

  14.  The Lady Isabella's Tragedy                                   155

  15.  A Hue and Cry after Cupid. By Ben. Jonson                     159

  16.  The King of France's Daughter                                 161

  17.  The Sweet Neglect. By Ben. Jonson                             169

  18.  The Children in the Wood                                      169

  19.  A Lover of late was I                                         177

  20.  The King and the Miller of Mansfield                          178

  21.  The Shepherd's Resolution. By George Wither                   188

  22.  Queen Dido (or the Wandering Prince of Troy)                  191

  23.  The Witches' Song. By Ben. Jonson                             196

  24.  Robin Good-fellow                                             199

  25.  The Fairy Queen                                               204

  26.  The Fairies Farewell. By Bishop Corbet                        207


                            BOOK THE THIRD.

   1.  The Birth of St. George                                       215

   2.  St. George and the Dragon                                     224

   3.  Love will find out the Way                                    232

   4.  Lord Thomas and Fair Annet. A Scottish Ballad                 234

   5.  Unfading Beauty. By Thomas Carew                              239

   6.  George Barnwell                                               240

   7.  The Stedfast Shepherd. By George Wither                       253

   8.  The Spanish Virgin, or Effects of Jealousy                    255

   9.  Jealousy Tyrant of the Mind. By Dryden                        260

  10.  Constant Penelope                                             261

  11.  To Lucasta, on going to the Wars. By Col. Lovelace.           264

  12.  Valentine and Ursine                                          265

  13.  The Dragon of Wantley                                         279

  14.  St. George for England. The First Part                        288

  15.  St. George for England. The Second Part. By John Grubb        293

  16.  Margaret's Ghost. By David Mallet                             308

  17.  Lucy and Colin. By Thomas Tickel                              312

  18.  The Boy and the Mantle, as revised and altered by a
  modern hand                                                        315

  19.  The ancient Fragment of the Marriage of Sir Gawaine           323


                               APPENDIX.

  I.  The Wanton Wife of Bath                                        333

  II. Essay on the Ancient Metrical Romances, &c.                    339

  GLOSSARY                                                           377

  INDEX                                                              411

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

                    RELIQUES OF ANCIENT POETRY, ETC.

                           SERIES THE THIRD.




BOOK I.


[Illustration]

  "An ordinary song or ballad, that is the delight of the common
  people, cannot fail to please all such readers, as are not
  unqualified for the entertainment by their affectation or their
  ignorance; and the reason is plain, because the same paintings of
  nature which recommend it to the most ordinary reader, will appear
  beautiful to the most refined."--ADDISON, in _Spectator_, No. 70.

[Illustration]




POEMS ON KING ARTHUR, ETC.


The third volume being chiefly devoted to romantic subjects, may not be
improperly introduced with a few slight strictures on the old metrical
romances: a subject the more worthy attention, as it seems not to have
been known to such as have written on the nature and origin of books of
chivalry, that the first compositions of this kind were in verse, and
usually sung to the harp.[1]

FOOTNOTES:

[1] [See Appendix.]




I.

THE BOY AND THE MANTLE


Is printed verbatim from the old MS. described in the Preface.[2]
The Editor believes it more ancient than it will appear to be at
first sight; the transcriber of that manuscript having reduced the
orthography and style in many instances to the standard of his own
times.

The incidents of the _Mantle and the Knife_ have not, that I can
recollect, been borrowed from any other writer. The former of these
evidently suggested to Spenser his conceit of _Florimel's Girdle_, b.
iv. c. 5, st. 3.

    "That girdle gave the virtue of chaste love
    And wivehood true to all that did it beare;
    But whosoever contrarie doth prove,
    Might not the same about her middle weare,
    But it would loose or else asunder teare."

So it happened to the false Florimel, st. 16, when

          "Being brought, about her middle small
      They thought to gird, as best it her became,
      But by no means they could it thereto frame,
      For ever as they fastned it, it loos'd
      And fell away, as feeling secret blame, &c.
    That all men wondred at the uncouth sight
      And each one thought as to their fancies came.
      But she herself did think it done for spight,
      And touched was with secret wrath and shame
      Therewith, as thing deviz'd her to defame:
      Then many other ladies likewise tride
      About their tender loynes to knit the same,
      But it would not on none of them abide,
    But when they thought it fast, eftsoones it was untide.
    Thereat all knights gan laugh and ladies lowre,
      Till that at last the gentle Amoret
      Likewise assayed to prove that girdle's powre.
      And having it about her middle set
      Did find it fit withouten breach or let,
      Whereat the rest gan greatly to envie.
      But Florimel exceedingly did fret
      And snatching from her hand," &c.

As for the trial of the _Horne_, it is not peculiar to our poet:
it occurs in the old romance, intitled _Morte Arthur_, which was
translated out of French in the time of K. Edw. IV., and first printed
anno 1484. From that romance Ariosto is thought to have borrowed his
tale of the _Enchanted Cup_, c. 42, &c. See Mr. Warton's _Observations
on the Faerie Queen_, &c.

The story of the _Horn_ in _Morte Arthur_ varies a good deal from this
of our poet, as the reader will judge from the following extract:--"By
the way they met with a knight that was sent from Morgan la Faye to
king Arthur, and this knight had a fair horne all garnished with
gold, and the horne had such a virtue, that there might no ladye or
gentlewoman drinke of that horne, but if she were true to her husband:
and if shee were false she should spill all the drinke, and if shee
were true unto her lorde, shee might drink peaceably: and because of
queene Guenever and in despite of Sir Launcelot du Lake, this horne
was sent unto king Arthur." This horn is intercepted and brought unto
another king named Marke, who is not a whit more fortunate than the
British hero, for he makes "his qeene drinke thereof and an hundred
ladies moe, and there were but foure ladies of all those that drank
cleane," of which number the said queen proves not to be one (book ii.
chap. 22, ed. 1632).

In other respects the two stories are so different, that we have just
reason to suppose this ballad was written before that romance was
translated into English.

As for queen Guenever, she is here represented no otherwise than in
the old histories and romances. Holinshed observes, that "she was
evil reported of, as noted of incontinence and breach of faith to hir
husband" (vol. i. p. 93).

Such readers, as have no relish for pure antiquity, will find a more
modern copy of this ballad at the end of the volume.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [For Percy's further notes on this ballad see the modernized
  version (book iii. No. 18). Professor Child prints the ballad in
  his _English and Scottish Ballads_ (vol. i. p. 1) with a full
  notice of the various forms of the story by way of introduction.
  He writes:--"No incident is more common in romantic fiction than
  the employment of some magical contrivance as a test of conjugal
  fidelity, or of constancy in love. In some romances of the Round
  Table, and tales founded upon them, this experiment is performed
  by means either of an enchanted horn, of such properties that no
  dishonoured husband or unfaithful wife can drink from it without
  spilling, or of a mantle which will fit none but chaste women.
  The earliest known instances of the use of these ordeals are
  afforded by the _Lai du Corn_, by Robert Bikez, a French minstrel
  of the twelfth or thirteenth century, and the _Fabliau du Mantel_
  _Mautaillé_, which, in the opinion of a competent critic, dates
  from the second half of the thirteenth century, and is only the
  older lay worked up into a new shape (Wolf, _Ueber die Lais_, 327,
  sq., 342, sq.). We are not to suppose, however, that either of
  these pieces presents us with the primitive form of this humorous
  invention. Robert Bikez tells us that he learned his story from an
  abbot, and that 'noble ecclesiast' stood but one further back in a
  line of tradition which curiosity will never follow to its source."

  Here follows a list of "the most remarkable cases of the use of
  these and similar talismans in imaginative literature." To these
  may be added the garland described in the curious old story of the
  _Wright's Wife_, which has been printed since the publication of
  Mr. Child's work.

    "Haue here thys garlond of roses ryche,
    In alle thys lond ys none yt lyche;
      For ytt wylle euer be newe.
    Wete þou wele withowtyn fable,
    Alle the whyle thy wyfe ys stable
      The chaplett wolle hold hewe;
    And yf thy wyfe vse putry,
    Or tolle eny man to lye her by,
      Than wolle yt change hewe;
    And by the garlond þou may see,
    Fekylle or fals yf þat sche be,
      Or ellys yf sche be trewe."

  _The Wright's Chaste Wife_ (E. E. Text Soc. 1865, 1. 55-66).]

       *       *       *       *       *

    In the third day of may,
    To Carleile did come
    A kind curteous child,
    That cold[3] much of wisdome.

    A kirtle and a mantle                                              5
    This child had uppon,
    With 'brouches' and ringes[4]
    Full richelye bedone.[5]

    He had a sute of silke
    About his middle drawne;                                          10
    Without he cold of curtesye
    He thought itt much shame.

    God speed thee, king Arthur,
    Sitting at thy meate:
    And the goodly queene Guenéver,                                   15
    I cannott her forgett.

    I tell you, lords, in this hall;
    I hett[6] you all to 'heede';[7]
    Except you be the more surer
    Is you for to dread.                                              20

    He plucked out of his 'poterner,'[8][9]
    And longer wold not dwell,
    He pulled forth a pretty mantle,
    Betweene two nut-shells.

    Have thou here, king Arthur;                                      25
    Have thou heere of mee:
    Give itt to thy comely queene
    Shapen as itt is alreadye.

    Itt shall never become that wiffe,
    That hath once done amisse.                                       30
    Then every knight in the kings court
    Began to care for 'his.'[10]

    Forth came dame Guénever;
    To the mantle shee her 'hied';[11]
    The ladye shee was newfangle,                                     35
    But yett shee was affrayd.

    When shee had taken the mantle;
    She stoode as shee had beene madd:
    It was from the top to the toe
    As sheeres had itt shread.                                        40

    One while was itt 'gule';[12][13]
    Another while was itt greene;
    Another while was itt wadded:[14]
    Ill itt did her beseeme.

    Another while was it blacke                                       45
    And bore the worst hue:
    By my troth, quoth king Arthur,
    I thinke thou be not true.

    Shee threw downe the mantle,
    That bright was of blee;[15]                                      50
    Fast with a rudd[16] redd,
    To her chamber can[17] shee flee.

    She curst the weaver, and the walker,[18]
    That clothe that had wrought;
    And bade a vengeance on his crowne,                               55
    That hither hath itt brought.

    I had rather be in a wood,
    Under a greene tree;
    Then in king Arthurs court
    Shamed for to bee.                                                60

    Kay called forth his ladye,
    And bade her come neere;
    Saies, Madam, and thou be guiltye,
    I pray thee hold thee there.

    Forth came his ladye                                              65
    Shortlye and anon;
    Boldlye to the mantle
    Then is shee gone.

    When she had tane the mantle,
    And cast it her about;                                            70
    Then was shee bare
    'Before all the rout.'[19]

    Then every knight,
    That was in the kings court,
    Talked, laughed, and showted[20]                                  75
    Full oft att that sport.

    Shee threw downe the mantle,
    That bright was of blee;
    Fast, with a red rudd,
    To her chamber can[1] shee flee.                                  80

    Forth came an old knight
    Pattering ore a creede,
    And he proferred to this litle boy
    Twenty markes to his meede;

    And all the time of the Christmasse                               85
    Willinglye to ffeede;
    For why this mantle might
    Doe his wiffe some need.

    When she had tane the mantle,
    Of cloth that was made,                                           90
    Shee had no more left on her,
    But a tassell and a threed:
    Then every knight in the kings court
    Bade evill might shee speed.

    Shee threw downe the mantle,                                      95
    That bright was of blee;
    And fast, with a redd rudd,
    To her chamber can[21] shee flee.

    Craddocke called forth his ladye,
    And bade her come in;                                            100
    Saith, Winne this mantle, ladye,
    With a litle dinne.

    Winne this mantle, ladye,
    And it shal be thine,
    If thou never did amisse                                         105
    Since thou wast mine.

    Forth came Craddockes ladye
    Shortlye and anon;
    But boldlye to the mantle
    Then is shee gone.                                               110

    When shee had tane the mantle,
    And cast itt her about,
    Upp att her great toe
    It began to crinkle and crowt:[22]
    Shee said, bowe downe, mantle,                                   115
    And shame me not for nought.

    Once I did amisse,
    I tell you certainlye,
    When I kist Craddockes mouth
    Under a greene tree;                                             120
    When I kist Craddockes mouth
    Before he marryed mee.

    When shee had her shreeven,
    And her sines shee had tolde;
    The mantle stoode about her                                      125
    Right as shee wold:

    Seemelye of coulour
    Glittering like gold:
    Then every knight in Arthurs court
    Did her behold.                                                  130

    Then spake dame Guénever
    To Arthur our king;
    She hath tane yonder mantle
    Not with right, but with wronge.[23]

    See you not yonder woman,                                        135
    That maketh her self soe 'cleane'?[24]
    I have seene tane out of her bedd
    Of men fiveteene;

    Priests, clarkes, and wedded men
    From her bedeene:[25][26]                                        140
    Yett shee taketh the mantle,
    And maketh her self cleane.

    Then spake the litle boy,
    That kept the mantle in hold;
    Sayes, king, chasten thy wiffe,                                  145
    Of her words shee is to bold:

    Shee is a bitch and a witch,
    And a whore bold:
    King, in thine owne hall
    Thou art a cuckold.                                              150

    The litle boy stoode[27]
    Looking out a dore;[28]
    [And there as he was lookinge
    He was ware of a wyld bore.]

    He was ware of a wyld bore,[29]                                  155
    Wold have werryed a man:[29]
    He pulld forth a wood kniffe,
    Fast thither that he ran:
    He brought in the bores head,
    And quitted him like a man.                                      160

    He brought in the bores head,
    And was wonderous bold:
    He said there was never a cuckolds kniffe
    Carve itt that cold.

    Some rubbed their knives                                         165
    Uppon a whetstone:
    Some threw them under the table,
    And said they had none.

    King Arthur, and the child
    Stood looking upon them;
    All their knives edges
    Turned backe againe.[30]                                         170

    Craddocke had a litle knive
    Of iron and of steele;
    He britled[31] the bores head[32]                                175
    Wonderous weele;
    That every knight in the kings court
    Had a morssell.

    The litle boy had a horne,
    Of red gold that ronge:                                          180
    He said, there was noe cuckolde
    Shall drinke of my horne;
    But he shold it sheede[33]
    Either behind or beforne.

    Some shedd on their shoulder,                                    185
    And some on their knee;
    He that cold not hitt his mouthe,
    Put it in his eye:
    And he that was a cuckold
    Every man might him see.                                         190

    Craddocke wan the horne,
    And the bores head:
    His ladie wan the mantle
    Unto her meede.
    Everye such a lovely ladye                                       195
    God send her well to speede.

FOOTNOTES:

[2] [Percy folio MS. ed. Hales and Furnivall, vol. ii. pp. 301-311.]

[3] [knew.]

[4] Ver. 7. branches, MS.

[5] [ornamented.]

[6] [bid.]

[7] V. 18. heate, MS.

[8] [probably a pouch or bag, but there is no authority for the word.]

[9] Ver. 21. potewer, MS.

[10] V. 32. his wiffe, MS.

[11] V. 34. biled, MS.

[12] [red.]

[13] V. 41. gaule, MS.

[14] [light blue or woad coloured.]

[15] [colour.]

[16] [ruddy.]

[17] [began.]

[18] [fuller.]

[19] [Ver. 72. all above the buttockes, MS.]

[20] V. 75. lauged, MS.

[21] [began.]

[22] [draw close together, another form of _crowd_.]

[23] Ver. 134. wright, MS.

[24] V. 136. cleare, MS.

[25] [forthwith.]

[26] Ver. 140. by deene, MS.

[27] [V. 151. a little boy, MS.]

[28] [V. 152. looking over.]

[29] [V. 155-6. these two lines belong to the former stanza.]

[30] Ver. 170. them upon, MS.

[31] [carved.]

[32] V. 175. _or_ birtled, MS.

[33] [shed.]




II.

THE MARRIAGE OF SIR GAWAINE


Is chiefly taken from the fragment of an old ballad in the Editor's
MS., which he has reason to believe more ancient than the time of
_Chaucer_, and what furnished that bard with his _Wife of Bath's Tale_.
The original was so extremely mutilated, half of every leaf being torn
away, that without large supplements, &c. it was deemed improper for
this collection: these it has therefore received, such as they are.
They are not here particularly pointed out, because the _Fragment_
itself will now be found printed at the end of this volume.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [Sir Frederic Madden supposed this ballad to be founded upon the
  _Weddynge of Syr Gawen and Dame Ragnell_, which he printed from the
  Rawlinson MS. c. 86, fol. 128 b, in his _Syr Gawaine_.

  Mr. Hales writes as follows respecting the various forms in which
  the story appears in literature. "The wonderful 'metamorphosis' on
  which this story turns is narrated in Gower's _Confessio Amantis_,
  as the story of Florent and the King of Sicily's Daughter, taken
  by him, as Tyrwhitt conjectures, from the _Gesta Romanorum_,
  or some such collection. It appears again, as the reader will
  remember, in Chaucer's _Wyf of Bathes Tale_. 'Worked over,' says
  Prof. Child, 'by some ballad-monger of the sixteenth century, and
  of course reduced to ditch-water, this tale has found its way
  into the _Crown Garland of Golden Roses_, part i. p. 68 (_Percy
  Society_, vol. vi.), 'Of a Knight and a Faire Virgin.' On a similar
  transformation depends the story of 'King Henrie' in Scott's
  _Minstrelsy_, edited from Mrs. Brown's MS., with corrections from
  a recited fragment, and modernized as 'Courteous King Jamie' in
  Lewis's _Tales of Wonder_. 'The prime original,' says Scott, 'is to
  be found in an Icelandic Saga.'"[34]

  Mr. Child prints (_English and Scottish Ballads_, vol. viii. p.
  139) two versions of a Scotch ballad entitled _Kempy Kaye_, which
  he supposes to be an extravagant parody of _The Marriage of Sir_
  _Gawaine_.]

       *       *       *       *       *

                            PART THE FIRST.

    King Arthur lives in merry Carleile,
      And seemely is to see;
    And there with him queene Guenever,
      That bride soe bright of blee.[35]

    And there with him queene Guenever,                                5
      That bride so bright in bowre:
    And all his barons about him stoode,
      That were both stiffe and stowre.[36]

    The king a royale Christmasse kept,
      With mirth and princelye cheare;                                10
    To him repaired many a knighte,
      That came both farre and neare.

    And when they were to dinner sette,
      And cups went freely round;
    Before them came a faire damsèlle,                                15
      And knelt upon the ground.

    A boone, a boone, O kinge Arthùre,
      I beg a boone of thee;
    Avenge me of a carlish knighte,
      Who hath shent[37] my love and mee.                             20

    At Tearne-Wadling[38] his castle stands,
      Near to that lake so fair,
    And proudlye rise the battlements,
      And streamers deck the air.

    Noe gentle knighte, nor ladye gay,                                25
      May pass that castle-walle:
    But from that foule discurteous knighte,
      Mishappe will them befalle.

    Hee's twyce the size of common men,
      Wi' thewes, and sinewes stronge,                                30
    And on his backe he bears a clubbe,
      That is both thicke and longe.

    This grimme baròne 'twas our harde happe,
      But yester morne to see;
    When to his bowre he bare my love,                                35
      And sore misused mee.

    And when I told him, king Arthùre
      As lyttle shold him spare;
    Goe tell, sayd hee, that cuckold kinge,
      To meete mee if he dare.                                        40

    Upp then sterted king Arthùre,
      And sware by hille and dale,
    He ne'er wolde quitt that grimme baròne,
      Till he had made him quail.

    Goe fetch my sword Excalibar:                                     45
      Goe saddle mee my steede;
    Nowe, by my faye, that grimme baròne
      Shall rue this ruthfulle deede.

    And when he came to Tearne Wadlinge
      Benethe the castle walle:                                       50
    "Come forth; come forth; thou proude baròne,
      Or yielde thyself my thralle."

    On magicke grounde that castle stoode,
      And fenc'd with many a spelle:
    Noe valiant knighte could tread thereon,                          55
      But straite his courage felle.

    Forth then rush'd that carlish[39] knight,
      King Arthur felte the charme:
    His sturdy sinewes lost their strengthe,
      Downe sunke his feeble arme.                                    60

    Nowe yield thee, yield thee, kinge Arthùre,
      Now yield thee, unto mee:
    Or fighte with mee, or lose thy lande,
      Noe better termes maye bee,

    Unlesse thou sweare upon the rood,                                65
      And promise on thy faye,
    Here to returne to Tearne-Wadling,
      Upon the new-yeare's daye;

    And bringe me worde what thing it is
      All women moste desyre;                                         70
    This is thy ransome, Arthur, he sayes,
      He have noe other hyre.

    King Arthur then helde up his hande,
      And sware upon his faye,[40]
    Then tooke his leave of the grimme barone                         75
      And faste hee rode awaye.

    And he rode east, and he rode west,
      And did of all inquyre,
    What thing it is all women crave,
      And what they most desyre.                                      80

    Some told him riches, pompe, or state;
      Some rayment fine and brighte;
    Some told him mirthe; some flatterye;
      And some a jollye knighte.

    In letters all king Arthur wrote,                                 85
      And seal'd them with his ringe:
    But still his minde was helde in doubte,
      Each tolde a different thinge.

    As ruthfulle he rode over a more,
      He saw a ladye sette                                            90
    Betweene an oke, and a greene holléye,
      All clad in red[41] scarlette.

    Her nose was crookt and turnd outwàrde,
      Her chin stoode all awrye;
    And where as sholde have been her mouthe,                         95
      Lo! there was set her eye:

    Her haires, like serpents, clung aboute
      Her cheekes of deadlye hewe:
    A worse-form'd ladye than she was,
      No man mote ever viewe.                                        100

    To hail the king in seemelye sorte
      This ladye was fulle faine;
    But king Arthùre all sore amaz'd,
      No aunswere made againe.

    What wight art thou, the ladye sayd,                             105
      That wilt not speake to mee;
    Sir, I may chance to ease thy paine,
      Though I be foule to see.

    If thou wilt ease my paine, he sayd,
      And helpe me in my neede;                                      110
    Ask what thou wilt, thou grimme ladyè,
      And it shall bee thy meede.

    O sweare mee this upon the roode,
      And promise on thy faye;
    And here the secrette I will telle,                              115
      That shall thy ransome paye.

    King Arthur promis'd on his faye,
      And sware upon the roode;
    The secrette then the ladye told,
      As lightlye well shee cou'de.                                  120

    Now this shall be my paye, sir king,
      And this my guerdon bee,
    That some yong fair and courtlye knight,
      Thou bringe to marrye mee.

    Fast then pricked king Arthùre                                   125
      Ore hille, and dale, and downe:
    And soone he founde the barone's bowre:
      And soone the grimme baroùne.

    He bare his clubbe upon his backe,
      Hee stoode bothe stiffe and stronge;                           130
    And, when he had the letters reade,
      Awaye the lettres flunge.

    Nowe yielde thee, Arthur, and thy lands,
      All forfeit unto mee;
    For this is not thy paye, sir king,                              135
      Nor may thy ransome bee.

    Yet hold thy hand, thou proud baròne,
      I praye thee hold thy hand;
    And give mee leave to speake once more
      In reskewe of my land.                                         140

    This morne, as I came over a more,
      I saw a ladye sette
    Betwene an oke, and a greene hollèye,
      All clad in red scarlètte.

    Shee sayes, all women will have their wille,                     145
      This is their chief desyre;
    Now yield, as thou art a barone true,
      That I have payd mine hyre.

    An earlye vengeaunce light on her!
      The carlish baron swore:                                       150
    Shee was my sister tolde thee this,
      And shee's a mishapen whore.

    But here I will make mine avowe,
      To do her as ill a turne:
    For an ever I may that foule theefe gette,                       155
      In a fyre I will her burne.

       *       *       *       *       *


                           PART THE SECONDE.

    Homewarde pricked king Arthùre,
      And a wearye man was hee;
    And soone he mette queene Guenever,
      That bride so bright of blee.

    What newes! what newes! thou noble king,                           5
      Howe, Arthur, hast thou sped?
    Where hast thou hung the carlish knighte?
      And where bestow'd his head?

    The carlish knight is safe for mee,
      And free fro mortal harme:                                      10
    On magicke grounde his castle stands,
      And fenc'd with many a charme.

    To bowe to him I was fulle faine,
      And yielde mee to his hand:
    And but for a lothly ladye, there                                 15
      I sholde have lost my land.

    And nowe this fills my hearte with woe,
      And sorrowe of my life;
    I swore a yonge and courtlye knight,
      Sholde marry her to his wife.                                   20

    Then bespake him sir Gawàine,
      That was ever a gentle knighte:
    That lothly ladye I will wed;
      Therefore be merrye and lighte.

    Nowe naye, nowe naye, good sir Gawàine;                           25
      My sister's sonne yee bee;
    This lothlye ladye's all too grimme,
      And all too foule for yee.

    Her nose is crookt and turn'd outwàrde;
      Her chin stands all awrye;                                      30
    A worse form'd ladye than shee is
      Was never seen with eye.

    What though her chin stand all awrye.
      And shee be foule to see:
    I'll marry her, unkle, for thy sake,                              35
      And I'll thy ransome bee.

    Nowe thankes, nowe thankes, good sir Gawàine;
      And a blessing thee betyde!
    To-morrow wee'll have knights and squires,
      And wee'll goe fetch thy bride.                                 40

    And wee'll have hawkes and wee'll have houndes,
      To cover our intent;
    And wee'll away to the greene forèst,
      As wee a hunting went.

    Sir Lancelot, sir Stephen[42] bolde,                              45
      They rode with them that daye;
    And foremoste of the companye
      There rode the stewarde Kaye:

    Soe did sir Banier[43] and sir Bore,[44]
      And eke sir Garratte[45] keene;                                 50
    Sir Tristram too, that gentle knight,
      To the forest freshe and greene.

    And when they came to the greene forrèst,
      Beneathe a faire holley tree
    There sate that ladye in red scarlètte                            55
      That unseemelye was to see.

    Sir Kay beheld that lady's face,
      And looked upon her sweere;[46]
    Whoever kisses that ladye, he sayes,
      Of his kisse he stands in feare.                                60

    Sir Kay beheld that ladye againe,
      And looked upon her snout;
    Whoever kisses that ladye, he sayes,
      Of his kisse he stands in doubt.

    Peace, brother Kay, sayde sir Gawàine,                            65
      And amend thee of thy life:
    For there is a knight amongst us all,
      Must marry her to his wife.

    What marry this foule queane, quoth Kay,
      I' the devil's name anone;                                      70
    Gett mee a wife wherever I maye,
      In sooth shee shall be none.

    Then some tooke up their hawkes in haste,
      And some took up their houndes;
    And sayd they wolde not marry her,                                75
      For cities, nor for townes.

    Then bespake him king Arthùre,
      And sware there by this daye;
    For a little foule sighte and mislikìnge,
      Yee shall not say her naye.                                     80

    Peace, lordings, peace; sir Gawaine sayd;
      Nor make debate and strife;
    This lothlye ladye I will take,
      And marry her to my wife.

    Nowe thankes, nowe thankes, good sir Gawaine,                     85
      And a blessinge be thy meede!
    For as I am thine owne ladyè,
      Thou never shalt rue this deede.

    Then up they took that lothly dame,
      And home anone they bringe:                                     90
    And there sir Gawaine he her wed,
      And married her with a ringe.

    And when they were in wed-bed laid,
      And all were done awaye:
    "Come turne to mee, mine owne wed-lord                            95
      Come turne to mee I praye."

    Sir Gawaine scant could lift his head,
      For sorrowe and for care;
    When, lo! instead of that lothelye dame,
      Hee sawe a young ladye faire.                                  100

    Sweet blushes stayn'd her rud-red cheeke,
      Her eyen were blacke as sloe:
    The ripening cherrye swellde her lippe,
      And all her necke was snowe.

    Sir Gawaine kiss'd that lady faire,                              105
      Lying upon the sheete:
    And swore, as he was a true knighte,
      The spice was never soe sweete.

    Sir Gawaine kiss'd that lady brighte,
      Lying there by his side:                                       110
    "The fairest flower is not soe faire:
      Thou never can'st bee my bride."

    I am thy bride, mine owne deare lorde,
      The same whiche thou didst knowe,
    That was soe lothlye, and was wont                               115
      Upon the wild more to goe.

    Nowe, gentle Gawaine, chuse, quoth shee,
      And make thy choice with care;
    Whether by night, or else by daye,
      Shall I be foule or faire?                                     120

    "To have thee foule still in the night,
      When I with thee should playe!
    I had rather farre, my lady deare,
      To have thee foule by daye."

    What when gaye ladyes goe with their lordes                      125
      To drinke the ale and wine;
    Alas! then I must hide myself,
      I must not goe with mine?

    "My faire ladyè, sir Gawaine sayd,
      I yield me to thy skille;                                      130
    Because thou art mine owne ladyè
      Thou shalt have all thy wille."

    Nowe blessed be thou, sweete Gawàine,
      And the daye that I thee see;
    For as thou seest mee at this time,                              135
      Soe shall I ever bee.

    My father was an aged knighte,
      And yet it chanced soe,
    He tooke to wife a false ladyè,
      Whiche broughte me to this woe.                                140

    Shee witch'd mee, being a faire yonge maide,
      In the greene forèst to dwelle;
    And there to abide in lothlye shape,
      Most like a fiend of helle.

    Midst mores and mosses; woods, and wilds;                        145
      To lead a lonesome life:
    Till some yong faire and courtlye knighte
      Wolde marrye me to his wife:

    Nor fully to gaine mine owne trewe shape,
      Such was her devilish skille;                                  150
    Until he wolde yielde to be rul'd by mee,
      And let mee have all my wille.

    She witchd my brother to a carlish boore,
      And made him stiffe and stronge;
    And built him a bowre on magicke grounde,                        155
      To live by rapine and wronge.

    But now the spelle is broken throughe,
      And wronge is turnde to righte;
    Henceforth I shall bee a faire ladyè,
      And hee be a gentle knighte.                                   160

                                                                  [***]

FOOTNOTES:

[34] [Percy folio MS. ed. Hales and Furnivall, vol. i. p. 104.]

[35] [complexion.]

[36] [strong.]

[37] [abused.]

[38] _Tearne-Wadling_ is the name of a small lake [in Inglewood Forest]
near Hesketh in Cumberland, on the road from Penrith to Carlisle.
There is a tradition, that an old castle once stood near the lake,
the remains of which were not long since visible. _Tarn_, in the
dialect of that country, signifies a small lake, and is still in use.
["Tarn-Wadling ... has been for the last ten years a wide meadow grazed
by hundreds of sheep."--J. S. GLENNIE, in _Macmillan's Mag._ Dec.
1867, p. 167, col. 2.]

[39] churlish.

[40] faith.

[41] This was a common phrase in our old writers; so Chaucer, in his
prologue to the _Cant. Tales_, says of the wife of Bath:--

    "Her hosen were of fyne scarlet red."

[42] Sir F. Madden remarks that Sir Stephen does not appear in the
Round Table Romances.

[43] [Perhaps intended for Bedver, the King's Constable, Tennyson's
Bedivere, but more probably Ban of Benoyk, the brother of Bors.]

[44] [Bors de Gauves, or Gaunes.]

[45] [Gareth, or Gaheret, Sir Gawain's younger brother.]

[46] [neck.]




III.

KING RYENCE'S CHALLENGE.


This song is more modern than many of those which follow it, but is
placed here for the sake of the subject. It was sung before queene
Elizabeth at the grand entertainment at Kenelworth-castle in 1575, and
was probably composed for that occasion. In a letter describing those
festivities, it is thus mentioned: "A Minstral came forth with a sollem
song, warranted for story out of K. Arthur's acts, whereof I gat a
copy, and is this:

    "So it fell out on a Pentecost, &c."

After the song the narrative proceeds: "At this the Minstrell made a
pause and a curtezy for Primus Passus. More of the song is thear, but I
gatt it not."

The story in Morte Arthur, whence it is taken, runs as follows: "Came
a messenger hastely from king Ryence of North-Wales,--saying, that
king Ryence had discomfited and overcomen eleaven kings, and everiche
of them did him homage, and that was this: they gave him their beards
cleane flayne off.--wherefore the messenger came for king Arthur's
beard, for king Ryence had purfeled a mantell with kings beards, and
there lacked for one a place of the mantell, wherefore he sent for
his beard, or else he would enter into his lands, and brenn and slay,
and never leave till he have thy head and thy beard. Well, said king
Arthur, thou hast said thy message, which is the most villainous and
lewdest message that ever man heard sent to a king. Also thou mayest
see my beard is full young yet for to make a purfell of, but tell thou
the king that--or it be long he shall do to me homage on both his
knees, or else he shall leese his head." [B. i. c. 24. See also the
same Romance, b. i. c. 92.]

The thought seems to be originally taken from Jeff. Monmouth's _Hist._
b. x. c. 3. which is alluded to by Drayton in his _Poly-Olb. Song._
4 and by Spenser in _Faer. Qu._ 6. 1. 13. 15. See the Observations on
Spenser, vol. ii. p. 223.

The following text is composed of the best readings selected from three
different copies. The first in Enderbie's _Cambria Triumphans_, p.
197. The second in the Letter abovementioned. And the third inserted in
MS. in a copy of _Morte Arthur_, 1632, in the Bodleian Library.

Stow tells us, that king Arthur kept his round table at "diverse
places, but especially at Carlion, Winchester, and Camalet in
Somersetshire." This _Camalet_, sometimes a famous towne or castle, is
situate on a very high tor or hill, &c. (See an exact description in
Stowe's _Annals_, ed. 1631, p. 55.)

       *       *       *       *       *

      As it fell out on a Pentecost day,
    King Arthur at Camelot kept his court royall,
    With his faire queene dame Guenever the gay;
      And many bold barons sitting in hall;
      With ladies attired in purple and pall;                          5
    And heraults in hewkes,[47] hooting on high,
    Cryed, _Largesse, Largesse, Chevaliers tres-hardie_.[48]

    A doughty dwarfe to the uppermost deas[49]
      Right pertlye gan pricke, kneeling on knee;
    With steven[50] fulle stoute amids all the preas,[51]             10
      Sayd, Nowe sir king Arthur, God save thee, and see!
      Sir Ryence of North-gales[52] greeteth well thee,
    And bids thee thy beard anon to him send,
    Or else from thy jaws he will it off rend.

    For his robe of state is a rich scarlet mantle,                   15
      With eleven kings beards bordered[53] about,
    And there is room lefte yet in a kantle,[54]
      For thine to stande, to make the twelfth out:
      This must be done, be thou never so stout;
    This must be done, I tell thee no fable,                          20
    Maugre[55] the teethe of all thy round table.

    When this mortal message from his mouthe past,
      Great was the noyse bothe in hall and in bower:
    The king fum'd; the queene screecht; ladies were aghast;
      Princes puffd; barons blustred; lords began lower;
      Knights stormed; squires startled, like steeds in a stower;     26
    Pages and yeomen yell'd out in the hall,
    Then in came sir Kay, the 'king's' seneschal.

    Silence, my soveraignes, quoth this courteous knight,
      And in that stound the stowre[56] began still:                  30
    'Then' the dwarfe's dinner full deerely was dight;[57]
      Of wine and wassel he had his wille:
      And, when he had eaten and drunken his fill,
    An hundred pieces of fine coyned gold
    Were given this dwarf for his message bold.                       35

    But say to sir Ryence, thou dwarf, quoth the king,
      That for his bold message I do him defye;
    And shortlye with basins and pans will him ring
      Out of North-gales; where he and I
      With swords, and not razors, quickly shall trye,                40
    Whether he, or king Arthur will prove the best barbor:
    And therewith he shook his good sword Excalàbor.
           *       *       *       *       *

       *       *       *       *       *

  [+±+] Strada, in his _Prolusions_, has ridiculed the story of the
  Giant's Mantle, made of the Beards of Kings.

FOOTNOTES:

[47] [party-coloured coats.]

[48] _Largesse, Largesse._ The heralds resounded these words as oft
as they received of the bounty of the knights. See _Memoires de la_
_Chevalerie_, tom. i. p. 99.--The expression is still used in the form
of installing knights of the garter.

[49] [dais or upper table.]

[50] [voice.]

[51] [press.]

[52] [North Wales.]

[53] _i.e._ set round the border, as furs are now round the gowns of
Magistrates.

[54] [corner.]

[55] [in spite of.]

[56] [that moment the tumult.]

[57] [decked.]




IV.

KING ARTHUR'S DEATH.


                              A FRAGMENT.

The subject of this ballad is evidently taken from the old romance
_Morte Arthur_, but with some variations, especially in the concluding
stanzas; in which the author seems rather to follow the traditions of
the old Welsh Bards, who believed that King Arthur was not dead, "but
conveied awaie by the Fairies into some pleasant place, where he should
remaine for a time, and then returne againe and reign in as great
authority as ever." Holinshed, b. 5, c. 14, or as it is expressed
in an old Chronicle printed at Antwerp 1493, by Ger. de Leew, "The
Bretons supposen, that he [K. Arthur]--shall come yet and conquere all
Bretaigne, for certes this is the prophicye of Merlyn: He sayd, that
his deth shall be doubteous; and sayd soth, for men thereof yet have
doubte, and shullen for ever more,--for men wyt not whether that he
lyveth or is dede." See more ancient testimonies in Selden's _Notes on
Polyolbion, Song III._

This fragment being very incorrect and imperfect in the original MS.
hath received some conjectural emendations, and even a supplement of
three or four stanzas composed from the romance of _Morte Arthur_.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [The two ballads here entitled _King Arthur's Death_ and _The_
  _Legend of King Arthur_ are united in the Folio MS. (ed. Hales and
  Furnivall, vol. i. p. 497), but they are evidently two distinct
  songs. The first ballad forms part ii. of the MS. copy, which
  has fourteen verses at the end not printed here. The last four
  verses are printed at the end of the next ballad. Percy has taken
  great liberties with his original, and has not left a single line
  unaltered, as will be seen by comparing it with the original
  printed at the end. Additional lines are also interpolated which
  are now enclosed within brackets, and it will be seen that these
  unnecessary amplifications do not improve the effect of the poem.
  It will also be seen that in vv. 41-44 the father and son of the
  original are changed into uncle and nephew.

  This last scene in the life of King Arthur is the most beautiful
  and touching portion of his history, and the romancers and
  minstrels were never tired of telling it in every form.

  According to one tradition Arthur still sleeps under St. Michael's
  Mount ("the guarded Mount" of Milton's _Lycidas_), and according to
  another beneath Richmond Castle, Yorkshire.

  Mr. Willmott, in his edition of the _Reliques_, writes, "according
  to popular superstition in Sicily, Arthur is preserved alive by his
  sister la Fata Morgana, whose fairy palace is occasionally seen
  from Reggio in the opposite sea of Messina."]

       *       *       *       *       *

           *       *       *       *       *
    On Trinitye Mondaye in the morne,
      This sore battayle was doom'd to bee;
    Where manye a knighte cry'd, Well-awaye!
      Alacke, it was the more pittìe.

    Ere the first crowinge of the cocke,                               5
      When as the kinge in his bed laye,
    He thoughte sir Gawaine to him came,[58]
      And there to him these wordes did saye.

    Nowe, as you are mine unkle deare,
      And as you prize your life, this daye                           10
    O meet not with your foe in fighte;
      Putt off the battayle, if yee maye.

    For sir Launcelot is now in Fraunce,
      And with him many an hardye knighte:
    Who will within this moneth be backe,                             15
      And will assiste yee in the fighte.

    The kinge then call'd his nobles all,
      Before the breakinge of the daye;
    And tolde them howe sir Gawaine came,
      And there to him these wordes did saye.                         20

    His nobles all this counsayle gave,
      That earlye in the morning, hee
    Shold send awaye an herauld at armes,
      To aske a parley faire and free.

    Then twelve good knightes king Arthure chose,                     25
      The best of all that with him were:
    To parley with the foe in field,
      And make with him agreement faire.

    The king he charged all his hoste,
      In readinesse there for to bee:                                 30
    But noe man sholde noe weapon sturre,
      Unlesse a sword drawne they shold see

    And Mordred on the other parte,
      Twelve of his knights did likewise bringe;
    The beste of all his companye,                                    35
      To hold the parley with the kinge.

    Sir Mordred alsoe charged his hoste,
      In readinesse there for to bee;
    But noe man sholde noe weapon sturre,
      But if a sworde drawne they shold see.                          40

    For he durste not his unkle truste,[59]
      Nor he his nephewe, sothe to tell:[59]
    Alacke! it was a woefulle case,
      As ere in Christentye befelle.

    But when they were together mette,                                45
      And both to faire accordance broughte;
    And a month's league betweene them sette,
      Before the battayle sholde be foughte;

    An addere crept forth of a bushe,
      Stunge one o' th' king's knightes on the knee:                  50
    Alacke! it was a woefulle chance,
      As ever was in Christentìe.

    When the knighte found him wounded sore,
      And sawe the wild-worme[60] hanginge there;
    His sworde he from his scabberde drewe;                           55
      A piteous case as ye shall heare.

    For when the two hostes sawe the sworde,
      They joyned battayle instantlye;
    Till of soe manye noble knightes,
      On one side there were left but three.                          60

    For all were slain that durst abide,
      And but some fewe that fled awaye:
    Ay mee! it was a bloodye fielde,
      As ere was foughte on summer's daye.

    Upon king Arthur's own partyè,                                    65
      Onlye himselfe escaped there,
    And Lukyn duke of Gloster free,
      And the king's butler Bedevere.

    And when the king beheld his knightes,
      All dead and scattered on the molde;                            70
    [The teares fast trickled downe his face;
      That manlye face in fight so bolde.

    Nowe reste yee all, brave knights, he said,
      Soe true and faithful to your trust:
    And must yee then, ye valiant hearts,                             75
      Be lefte to moulder into dust!

    Most loyal have yee been to mee,
      Most true and faithful unto deathe:
    And, oh! to rayse yee up againe,
      How freelye could I yield my breathe!]                          80

    But see the traitor's yet alive,
      Lo where hee stalkes among the deade!
    Nowe bitterlye he shall abye:[61]
      And vengeance fall upon his head.

    O staye, my liege, then sayd the duke;                            85
      O staye for love and charitìe;
    [Remember what the vision spake,
      Nor meete your foe, if it may bee.

    O, staye mee not, thou worthye wight,
      This debt my loyal knights I owe:                               90
    Betide me life, betide me death,
      I will avenge them of their foe.]

    Then straite he grasp'd his trustye speare,
      And on his horse then mounted hee:
    As his butler holpe him to his horse,                             95
      His bowels gushed to his knee.

    Alas! then sayd the noble king,
      That I should live this sight to see!
    To see this good knight here be slaine,
      All for his love in helping mee!                               100

    He put his speare into his reste,
      And to sir Mordred loud gan crye;
    [Nowe sette thyself upon thy guarde,
      For, traitor, nowe thy death is nye.

    Sir Mordred lifted up his sworde,                                105
      And fierce to meet the king ran hee:]
    The king his speare he through him thrust;
      A fathom thorow his bodìe.

    When Mordered felt the stroke of death,
      And found that he was wounded soe;                             110
    He thruste himselfe upon the speare,
      And strucke the king a deadlye blowe.

    Then grimmlye dyed sir Mordered,
      Presentlye upon that tree:
    And bloody streames ranne from the kinge                         115
      Ere to the duke returned hee.

    Sir Lukyn then he thus bespake,
      Sir knighte, thou hast beene faithfulle tryde,
    Nowe take my sword Excalibar,[62]
      That hangs so freelye by my syde:                              120

    O take my sword Excalibar,
      And there into the river throwe:
    For here, henceforth, benethe this tree,
      All use of weapons I foregoe.

    [And fare thee well, thou trustye sword,                         125
      A better neer had valiant knighte,
    With thee full ofte, and manye a daye,
      Have I withstood my foe in fighte.

    With this good fauchion in my hande,
      Oft have I reapd the bloody feelde:                            130
    But nowe the fatalle houre is come,
      That never more I may thee weelde.]

    The duke to the river side he went,
      And there his owne sword in threwe he:
    But he kept back Excalibar,                                      135
      He kept it back in privitie.

    [For all of coleyne[63] was the blade;
      And all the hilte of precious stone:
    And ever alacke! then sayd the knighte,
      Must such a sword awaye be throwne?]                           140

    Then backe he came unto the kinge,
      Who sayd, Sir Lukyn, what did yee see?
    Nothing, my liege, save that the winde
      Blewe oer the waters faire and free.

    O goe againe, then said the kinge,                               145
      O good sir Lukyn, goe againe:
    Into the rivere throwe my sword,
      Nor keepe me lingering here in paine.

    The duke then to the river went,
      And the kings scabberd in threwe hee;                          150
    But hee kept backe Excalibar,
      And hid it undernethe a tree.

    Then backe he came to tell the kinge,
      Who sayde, Sir Lukyn sawe ye oughte?
    Nothinge, my liege, save that the winde                          155
      Nowe with the angrye waters fought.

    O Lukyn, Lukyn, said the kinge,
      [Twice haste thou dealt deceytfullye:
    Alacke, whom may wee ever truste,
      When suche a knighte soe false can bee?                        160

    Saye, wouldst thou have thy master dead;
      All for a sword, that wins thine eye:
    Nowe goe againe, and throwe it in,
      Or here the one of us shall dye.]

    The duke, all shent with this rebuke,                            165
      No aunswere made unto the kinge:
    But to the rivere tooke the sworde,
      And threwe it far as he coulde flinge.

    A hande and an arme did meete the sworde,
      And flourishd three times in the air;                          170
    [Then sunke benethe the renninge streme,
      And of the duke was seene noe mair.

    All sore astonied stood the duke;
      He stood as still, as still mote bee:]
    Then hastend backe to telle the kinge;                           175
      But he was gone from under the tree.

    But to what place he cold not tell,
      For never after hee did him spye:[64]
    But hee sawe a barge goe from the land,
      And hee heard ladyes howle and crye[65].                       180

    And whether the kinge were there, or not,
      Hee never knewe, nor ever colde:
    [For from that sad and direfulle daye,
      Hee never more was scene on molde.]

                                                    [***]

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *


[The following forms Part II. of a ballad entitled _King Arthur's
Death_, in the folio MS. ed. Hales and Furnivall, vol. i. p. 501.

    but vpon a Monday after Trinity Sonday
    this battaile foughten cold bee,
    where many a Knight cryed well-away!
    alacke, the more pittye!

    but vpon Sunday in the euening then,                               5
    when the King in his bedd did Lye,
    he thought Sir Gawaine to him came,
    & thus to him did say:

    "Now as you are my vnckle deere,
    I pray you be ruled by mee,                                       10
    doe not fight as to-morrow day,
    but put the battelle of if you may;

    "for Sir Lancelott is now in france,
    & many Knights with him full hardye,
    & with-in this Month here hee wilbe,                              15
    great aide wilbe to thee."

    hee wakened forth of his dreames;
    to his Nobles that told hee,
    how he thought Sir Gawaine to him came,
    & these words sayd Certainly.                                     20

    & then thé gaue the King councell all,
    vpon Munday Earlye
    that hee shold send one of his heralds of armes
    to parle with his sonne, if itt might bee.

    & 12 knights King Arthur chose,                                   25
    the best in his companye,
    that they shold goe to meete his sonne,
    to agree if itt cold bee.

    & the King charged all his host
    in readynesse for to bee,                                         30
    that Noe man shold noe weapons stur
    with-out a sword drawne amongst his Knights thé see.

    & Mordred vpon the other part,
    12 of his Knights chose hee
    that they shold goe to meete his father                           35
    betweene those 2 hosts fayre & free.

    & Mordred charged his ost
    in like mannor most certaínely,
    that noe man shold noe weapons sturr
    with-out a sword drawne amongst them thé see;                     40

    for he durst not his father trust,
    nor the father the sonne certainley.
    Alacke! this was a woefull case
    as euer was in christentye!

    but when they were mett together there,                           45
    & agreed of all things as itt shold bee,
    & a monthes League then there was
    before the battele foughten shold bee,

    an Adder came forth of Bush,
    stunge one of king Arthirs Knights below his knee;                50
    alacke! this was a woefull chance
    as euer was in christentye!

    the Knight he found him wounded there,
    & see the wild worme there to bee;
    his sword out of his scabberd he drew;                            55
    alas! itt was the more pittye!

    & when these 2 osts saw they sword drawen,
    thé Ioyned battell certainlye,
    Till of a 100: 1000: men
    of one side was left but 3.                                       60

    but all were slaine that durst abyde,
    but some awaye that did flee.
    King Arthur upon his owne partye
    himselfe aliue cold be,

    & Lukin the Duke of Gloster,                                      65
    & Bedever his Butler certainlye
    the King looked about him there
    & saw his Knights all slaine to bee;

    "Alas!" then sayd noble King Arthur
    "that ever this sight I see!                                      70
    to see all my good Knights lye slaine,
    & the traitor yett aliue to bee!

    loe where he leanes vpon his sword hillts
    amongst his dead men certainlye!
    I will goe slay him att this time;                                75
    neuer att better advantage I shall him see."

    "Nay! stay here, my Leege!" then said the Duke,
    "for loue and charitye!
    for wee haue the battell woone,
    for yett aliue we are but 3:"                                     80

    the king wold not be perswaded then,
    but his horsse then mounted hee;
    his Butler [that] helped him to horsse,
    his bowells gushed to his knee.

    "Alas!" then said noble king Arthur,                              85
    "that this sight I euer see,
    to see this good knight for to be slaine
    for loue for to helpe mee!"

    he put his speare into his rest,
    & att his sonne he ryd feirclye,                                  90
    & through him there his speare he thrust
    a fatham thorrow his body.

    the sonne he felld him wounded there,
    & knew his death then to bee;
    he thrust himselfe vpon his speare,                               95
    & gaue his father a wound certainlye.

    but there dyed Sir Mordred
    presently vpon that tree.
    but or ere the King returned againe,
    his butler was dead certainlye.                                  100

    then bespake him Noble King Arthur,
    these were the words sayd hee,
    sayes "take my sword Escalberd
    from my side fayre & free,
    & throw itt into this riuer heere;                               105
    for all the vse of weapons Ile deliuer vppe,
    heere vnderneath this tree."

    the Duke to the riuer side he went,
    & his sword in threw hee;
    & then he kept Escalberd,                                        110
    I tell you certainlye;

    & then he came to tell the King,
    the king said, "Lukin what did thou see?"
    noe thing, my leege," the[n] sayd the duke,
    "I tell you certainlye."                                         115

    "O goe againe," said the king
    "for loue & charitye,
    & throw my sword into that riuer,
    that neuer I doe itt see."

    the Duke to the riuer side he went,                              120
    & the kings scaberd in threw hee;
    & still he kept Escalberd
    for vertue sake faire & free.

    he came againe to tell the King;
    the King sayd, "Lukin what did thou see?"                        125
    "nothing my leege," then sayd the Duke,
    "I tell you certainlye."

    "O goe againe Lukin," said the King,
    "or the one of vs shall dye."
    then the Duke to the riuer sid went,                             130
    & then Kings sword then threw hee:

    A hand & an arme did meete that sword,
    & flourished 3 times certainlye
    he came againe to tell the King,
    but the king was gone from vnder the tree                        135

    but to what place, he cold not tell,
    for neuer after hee did him see,
    but he see a barge from the land goe,
    & hearde Ladyes houle & cry certainlye;

    but whether the king was there or noe                            140
    he knew not certainlye.
    the Duke walked by that Riuers side
    till a chappell there found hee,

    & a preist by the aulter side there stood.
    the Duke kneeled downe there on his knee                         145
    & prayed the preists, "for Christs sake
    the rights of the church bestow on mee!"

    for many dangerous wounds he had vpon him
    & liklye he was to dye.
    & there the Duke liued in prayer                                 150
    till the time that hee did dye.

    King Arthur liued King 22 yeere
    in honor and great fame,
    & thus by death suddenlye
    was depriued from the same.                                      155

                                                                ffins.]

FOOTNOTES:

[58] Sir Gawaine had been killed at Arthur's landing on his return from
abroad. See the next ballad, ver. 73.

[59] [Ver. 41, 42, the folio MS. reads father ... sonne.]

[60] [serpent.]

[61] [pay for or expiate.]

[62] More commonly called, _Caliburn_. In the folio MS. _Escallberd_.
[Percy notes in the MS. that "Caliburn was presented A.D. 1191 to
Tancred, King of Sicily, by our King Richard I. See Rapin, vol. i."]

[63] [Cologne steel.]

[64] Ver. 178, see MS.

[65] Not unlike that passage in Virgil.

    "Summoque ulularunt vertice nymphæ."

_Ladies_ was the word our old English writers used for _Nymphs_: As in
the following lines of an old song in the Editor's folio MS.

    "When scorching Ph[oe]bus he did mount,
    Then Lady Venus went to hunt;
      To whom Diana did resort,
    With all the Ladyes of hills, and valleys
    Of springs, and floodes, &c."




V.

THE LEGEND OF KING ARTHUR.


We have here a short summary of K. Arthur's History as given by
Jeff. of Monmouth and the old chronicles, with the addition of a few
circumstances from the romance Morte Arthur.--The ancient chronicle
of Ger. de Leew (quoted above in p. 28), seems to have been chiefly
followed: upon the authority of which we have restored some of the
names which were corrupted in the MS. and have transposed one stanza,
which appeared to be misplaced, (_viz._ that beginning at ver. 49,
which in the MS. followed ver. 36.)

Printed from the Editor's ancient folio Manuscript.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [This ballad as previously stated is the first part of the poem in
  the MS. and precedes the one here printed before it. Percy made
  comparatively few alterations in this part and all of them are now
  noted at the foot of the page.]

       *       *       *       *       *

    Of Brutus' blood, in Brittaine borne,[66]
      King Arthur I am to name;
    Through Christendome, and Heathynesse,[67]
      Well knowne is my worthy fame.

    In Jesus Christ I doe beleeve;                                     5
      I am a christyan bore:[68][69]
    The Father, Sone, and Holy Gost
      One God, I doe adore.

    In the four hundred ninetieth yeere,[70]
      Over Brittaine I did rayne,                                     10
    After my savior Christ his byrth:
      What time I did maintaine

    The fellowshipp of the table round,
      Soe famous in those dayes;
    Whereatt a hundred noble knights,                                 15
      And thirty sat alwayes:[71]

    Who for their deeds and martiall feates,
      As bookes done yett record,
    Amongst all other nations[72]
      Wer feared throwgh the world.                                   20

    And in the castle off Tyntagill[73]
      King Uther mee begate
    Of Agyana a bewtyous ladye,[74]
      And come of "hie" estate.[75]

    And when I was fifteen yeere old,                                 25
      Then was I crowned kinge:
    All Brittaine that was att an upròre,
      I did to quiett bringe.

    And drove the Saxons from the realme,
      Who had opprest this land;                                      30
    All Scotland then throughe manly feats[76]
      I conquered with my hand.[76]

    Ireland, Denmarke, Norway,
      These countryes wan I all;
    Iseland, Gotheland, and Swethland;                                35
      And made their kings my thrall.

    I conquered all Gallya,
      That now is called France;
    And slew the hardye Froll in feild[77]
      My honor to advance.                                            40

    And the ugly gyant Dynabus[78]
      Soe terrible to vewe,
    That in Saint Barnards mount did lye,
      By force of armes I slew:

    And Lucyus the emperour of Rome                                   45
      I brought to deadly wracke;
    And a thousand more of noble knightes
      For feare did turne their backe:

    Five kinges of "paynims"[79] I did kill[80][81]
      Amidst that bloody strife;[81]                                  50
    Besides the Grecian emperour[81]
      Who alsoe lost his liffe.[81]

    Whose carcasse I did send to Rome
      Cladd poorlye on a beere;
    And afterward I past Mount-Joye                                   55
      The next approaching yeere.

    Then I came to Rome, where I was mett
      Right as a conquerour,
    And by all the cardinalls solempnelye
      I was crowned an emperour.                                      60

    One winter there I made abode:
      Then word to mee was brought
    How Mordred had oppressd the crowne:
      What treason he had wrought

    Att home in Brittaine with my queene;                             65
      Therfore I came with speede
    To Brittaine backe, with all my power,
      To quitt that traiterous deede:

    And soone at Sandwiche I arrivde,[82]
      Where Mordred me withstoode:                                    70
    But yett at last I landed there,
      With effusion of much blood.

    For there my nephew sir Gawaine dyed,
      Being wounded in that sore,[83]
    The whiche sir Lancelot in fight[84]                              75
      Had given him before.

    Thence chased I Mordered away,
      Who fledd to London right,
    From London to Winchester, and
      To Cornewalle tooke his flyght.[85]                             80

    And still I him pursued with speed
      Till at the last we mett:
    Whereby an appointed day of fight[86]
      Was there agreed and sett.[87]

    Where we did fight, of mortal life[88]                            85
      Eche other to deprive,[88]
    Till of a hundred thousand men
      Scarce one was left a live.

    There all the noble chivalrye
      Of Brittaine tooke their end.                                   90
    O see how fickle is their state
      That doe on feates depend![89][90]

    There all the traiterous men were slaine
      Not one escapte away;
    And there dyed all my vallyant knightes.                          95
      Alas! that woefull day![91]

    Two and twenty yeere I ware the crowne
      In honor and great fame;
    And thus by death was suddenlye
      Deprived of the same.                                          100

FOOTNOTES:

[66] Ver. 1. Bruite his, MS.

[67] [heathendom.]

[68] [born.]

[69] [V. 6. borne, MS.]

[70] V. 9. He began his reign A.D. 515, according to the Chronicles.

[71] [V. 16. sit, MS.]

[72] [V. 19. all nations, MS.]

[73] [pronounced "Tintadgell;" the remains of the castle still exist on
the north coast of Cornwall.]

[74] V. 23. She is named Igerna in the old Chronicles.

[75] V. 24. his, MS.

[76] [Ver. 31-2.

    And then I conquered througe manly feats,
    All Scottlande with my hands, MS.]

[77] V. 39. Froland feild, MS. Froll, according to the Chronicles, was
a Roman knight governor of Gaul.

[78] V. 41. Danibus, MS.

[79] [Pagans.]

[80] V. 49. of Pavye, MS.

[81] [V. 49-52. this stanza occurs after v. 36 in the MS.]

[82] [Ver. 69. and when at Sandwich I did land.]

[83] [V. 74. on that.]

[84] [V. 75. that Sir Lancelott.]

[85] [V. 80. he tooke. MS.]

[86] [Ver. 83. Wherby appointed.]

[87] [V. 84. was agreed.]

[88] [V. 85-6.

    Where wee did fight soe mortallye
    Of live eche other to deprive.]

[89] [V. 92. upon.]

[90] V. 92. perhaps fates.

[91] [V. 96 is the end of the first part in the MS., the stanza

    King Arthur lived King 22 yeere
      in honor and great fame
    and thus by death suddenlye
      was deprived from the same

ends the second part, which is printed by Percy as _King Arthur's_
_death_, see previous ballad.]




VI.

A DYTTIE TO HEY DOWNE.


Copied from an old MS. in the Cotton Library [British Museum] (Vesp. A.
xxv. fol. 170), intitled, "Divers things of Hen. viij's time."

       *       *       *       *       *

    Who sekes to tame the blustering winde,
      Or causse the floods bend to his wyll,
    Or els against dame nature's kinde
      To "change" things frame by cunning skyll:[92]
    That man I thinke bestoweth paine,                                 5
    Thoughe that his laboure be in vaine.

    Who strives to breake the sturdye steele,
      Or goeth about to staye the sunne;
    Who thinks to causse an oke to reele,
      Which never can by force be done:                               10
    That man likewise bestoweth paine,
    Thoughe that his laboure be in vaine.

    Who thinks to stryve against the streame,
      And for to sayle without a maste;
    Unlesse he thinks perhapps to faine,                              15
      His travell ys forelorne and waste;
    And so in cure of all his paine,
    His travell ys his cheffest gaine.

    So he lykewise, that goes about
      To please eche eye and every eare,
    Had nede to have withouten doubt
      A golden gyft with hym to beare;
    For evyll report shall be his gaine,
    Though he bestowe both toyle and paine.

    God grant eche man one to amend;                                  25
      God send us all a happy place;
    And let us pray unto the end,
      That we may have our princes grace:
    Amen, Amen! so shall we gaine
    A dewe reward for all our paine.                                  30

FOOTNOTES:

[92] Ver. 4. causse, MS.




VII.

GLASGERION.


An ingenious Friend thinks that the following old Ditty (which is
printed from the Editor's folio MS.) may possibly have given birth to
the Tragedy of the _Orphan_, in which Polidore intercepts Monimia's
intended favours to Castalio.

See what is said concerning the hero of this song, (who is celebrated
by _Chaucer_ under the name of _Glaskyrion_) in the Essay affixed to
vol. i. note H. pt. iv. (2).

       *       *       *       *       *

  [The hero of this ballad is the same as "gret Glascurion," placed
  by Chaucer in the _House of Fame_ by the side of Orpheus, and
  also associated with Orpheus by Gawain Douglas in the _Palice of
  Honour_. Percy's note in the Folio MS. is "It was not necessary to
  correct this much for the press;" (ed. Hales and Furnivall, vol. i.
  p. 246). It will be seen, however, by the collations at the foot
  of the page that several corrections were made, not always for the
  better. Thus ver. 96, "who did his ladye grieve," is certainly
  weaker than the original,--

    "And asked noe man noe leave."

  Jamieson (_Popular Ballads_, 1806, vol. i. p. 91) prints an
  inferior version under the name of _Glenkindie_. Mr. Hale points
  out, however, that "the Scotch version is more perfect in one
  point--in the test question put to the page before the assignation
  is disclosed to him:--

    'O mith I tell you, Gib my man,
    Gin I a man had slain?'

  Some such question perhaps would give more force to vv. 85-88 of
  our version." He also very justly observes, "perhaps there is no
  ballad that represents more keenly the great gulf fixed between
  churl and noble--a profounder horror at the crossing over it."]

       *       *       *       *       *

    Glasgerion was a kings owne sonne,
      And a harper he was goode:
    He harped in the kinges chambere,
      Where cuppe and candle stoode.[93]

    And soe did hee in the queens chamber,                             5
      Till ladies waxed "glad."[94]
    And then bespake the kinges daughter;
      And these wordes thus shee sayd.[95]

    Strike on, strike on, Glasgèrion,[96]
      Of thy striking doe not blinne:[97]                             10
    Theres never a stroke comes oer thy harpe,[98]
      But it glads my hart withinne.

    Faire might he fall,[99] ladye, quoth hee,[100]
      Who taught you nowe to speake!
    I have loved you, ladye, seven longe yeere[101]                   15
      My minde I neere durst breake.[102]

    But come to my bower, my Glasgèrion,
      When all men are att rest:
    As I am a ladie true of my promise,
      Thou shalt bee a welcome guest.                                 20

    Home then came Glasgèrion,[103]
      A glad man, lord! was hee.
    And, come thou hither, Jacke my boy;
      Come hither unto mee.[104]

    For the kinges daughter of Normandye                              25
      Hath granted mee my boone:
    And att her chambere must I bee
      Beffore the cocke have crowen.

    O master, master, then quoth hee,[105]
      Lay your head downe on this stone:                              30
    For I will waken you, master deere,
      Afore it be time to gone.

    But up then rose that lither[106] ladd,
      And hose and shoone did on:[107]
    A coller he cast upon his necke,                                  35
      Hee seemed a gentleman.

    And when he came to the ladies chamber,
      He thrild upon a pinn.[108]
    The lady was true of her promise,
      Rose up and lett him in.                                        40

    He did not take the lady gaye
      To boulster nor to bed:[109]
    "Nor thoughe hee had his wicked wille,[110]
      "A single word he sed."[110]

    He did not kisse that ladyes mouthe,[111]                         45
      Nor when he came, nor youd:[112][113]
    And sore mistrusted that ladye gay,
      He was of some churls bloud.

    But home then came that lither ladd,
      And did off his hose and shoone;                                50
    And cast the coller from off his necke:[114]
      He was but a churlès sonne.

    Awake, awake, my deere master,[115]
      [The cock hath well-nigh crowen.[116]
    Awake, awake, my master deere,][116]                              55
      I hold it time to be gone.

    For I have saddled your horsse, mastèr,
      Well bridled I have your steede:
    And I have served you a good breakfast:[117]
      For thereof ye have need.[118]                                  60

    Up then rose, good Glasgeriòn,[119]
      And did on hose and shoone;
    And cast a coller about his necke:
      For he was a kinge his sonne.[120]

    And when he came to the ladyes chamber,[121]                      65
      He thrild upon the pinne:[122]
    The ladye was more than true of promise,
      And rose and let him in.[123]

    Saies, whether have you left with me
      Your bracelett or your glove?                                   70
    Or are you returned backe againe[124]
      To know more of my love?

    Glasgèrion swore a full great othe
      By oake, and ashe, and thorne;
    Lady, I was never in your chambèr.                                75
      Sith the time that I was borne.

    O then it was your lither foot-page,[125]
      He hath beguiled mee.[126]
    Then shee pulled forth a little pen-kniffe,[127]
      That hanged by her knee:                                        80

    Sayes, there shall never noe churlès blood
      Within my bodye spring:[128]
    [No churlès blood shall ever defile[129]
      The daughter of a kinge.][129]

    Home then went Glasgèrion,[130]                                   85
      And woe, good lord, was hee.[131]
    Sayes, come thou hither, Jacke my boy,[132]
      Come hither unto mee.[133]

    If I had killed a man to night,[134]
      Jacke, I would tell it thee:                                    90
    But if I have not killed a man to night
      Jacke, thou hast killed three.

    And he puld out his bright browne sword,
      And dryed it on his sleeve,
    And he smote off that lither ladds head,                          95
      Who did his ladye grieve.[135]

    He sett the swords poynt till his brest,
      The pummil untill a stone:[136]
    Throw the falsenesse of that lither ladd,
      These three lives werne all gone.                              100

FOOTNOTES:

[93] [Ver. 4. where cappe and candle yoode, MS.]

[94] V. 6. wood, MS.

[95] [V. 8. sayd shee, MS.]

[96] [V. 9. saide, strike.]

[97] [cease.]

[98] [V. 11. over this.]

[99] [well may be thine.]

[100] [V. 13. you fall.]

[101] [V. 15. 7 yeere.]

[102] [V. 16. my hart I durst neere breake.]

[103] [V. 21. but whom then.]

[104] [V. 24. her love is granted mee.]

[105] [Ver. 29. but come you hither Master, quoth he.]

[106] [wicked.]

[107] [V. 34. and did on hose and shoone.]

[108] This is elsewhere expressed "_twirled the pin_," or "_tirled at_
_the pin_" (see b. ii. s. vi. v. 3.) and seems to refer to the turning
round the button on the outside of a door, by which the latch rises,
still used in cottages.

[The explanation given by Percy in this note is an unfounded guess.
The Risp or tirling pin was very generally used in the north to do the
duty afterwards performed by the knocker. There are several of these
curious contrivances in the Antiquarian Museum at Edinburgh, and they
are described by D. Wilson in his _Memorials of Edinburgh in the Olden
Time_, as follows,--"These antique precursors of the knocker and bell
are still frequently to be met with in the steep turnpikes of the Old
Town, notwithstanding the cupidity of the Antiquarian collectors. The
ring is drawn up and down the notched iron rod and makes a very audible
noise within." (1848, vol. i. p. 97).]

[109] [V. 42. nor noe bed.]

[110] [V. 43-4.

    but downe upon her chamber flore
    full soone he hath her layd.]

[111] [Ver. 45. that lady gay.]

[112] [went.]

[113] [Ver. 46. when he came nor when he youd.]

[114] [V. 51. that coller from about.]

[115] [V. 53. awaken quoth hee my master deere.]

[116] [V. 54-5. not in MS.]

[117] [V. 59. have not I served a.]

[118] [V. 60. when times comes I have need.]

[119] [V. 61. but up.]

[120] [V. 64. he was a kinges sonne.]

[121] [V. 65. that ladies.]

[122] [V. 66. upon a.]

[123] [V. 68. rose up and.]

[124] [V. 71. you are. MS]

[125] Ver. 77. litle, MS.

[126] [V. 78. falsly hath.]

[127] [V. 79. and then.]

[128] [V. 82. spring within my body.]

[129] [V. 83-4. not in MS.]

[130] [V. 85. but home then.]

[131] [V. 86. a woe man good was hee.]

[132] [V. 87. come hither thou.]

[133] [V. 88. come thou.]

[134] [V. 89. ffor if.]

[135] [V. 96. and asked noe man noe leave.]

[136] [V. 98. till a. MS.]




VIII.

OLD ROBIN OF PORTINGALE.


From an ancient copy in the Editor's folio MS. which was judged to
require considerable corrections.

In the former edition the hero of this piece had been called Sir Robin,
but that title not being in the MS. is now omitted.

_Giles_, steward to a rich old merchant trading to _Portugal_, is
qualified with the title of _Sir_, not as being a knight, but rather, I
conceive, as having received an inferior order of priesthood.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [Percy's note in the MS. is as follows, "When I first set to
  examine this I had not yet learnt to hold this old MS. in much
  regard." Every line is altered, so that it has been necessary to
  add a copy of the original, although the interest of the ballad
  itself is not very great. Percy's most notable correction is the
  introduction of 20 good knights to help Robin against his wife's
  twenty-four traitors.]

       *       *       *       *       *

    Let never again soe old a man
      Marrye soe yonge a wife,
    As did old Robin of Portingale;
      Who may rue all the dayes of his life.

    For the mayors daughter of Lin, god wott,                          5
      He chose her to his wife,
    And thought with her to have lived in love,
      By they fell to hate and strife.

    They scarce were in their wed-bed laid,
      And scarce was hee asleepe,                                     10
    But upp shee rose, and forth shee goes,
      To the steward, and gan to weepe.

    Sleepe you, wake you, faire sir Gyles?
      Or be you not within?
    Sleepe you, wake you, faire sir Gyles,                            15
      Arise and let me inn.

    O, I am waking, sweete, he said,
      Sweete ladye, what is your will?
    I have unbethought me of a wile[137]
      How my wed-lord weell spill.[138]                               20

    Twenty-four good knights, shee sayes.
      That dwell about this towne,
    Even twenty-four of my next cozèns,
      Will helpe to dinge[139] him downe.

    All that beheard his litle footepage,                             25
      As he watered his masters steed;
    And for his masters sad perille
      His verry heart did bleed.

    He mourned still, and wept full sore;
      I sweare by the holy roode                                      30
    The teares he for his master wept
      Were blent water and bloude.[140]

    And that beheard his deare mastèr
      As he stood at his garden pale:
    Sayes, Ever alacke, my litle foot-page,                           35
      What causes thee to wail?

    Hath any one done to thee wronge
      Any of thy fellowes here?
    Or is any of thy good friends dead,
      That thou shedst manye a teare?                                 40

    Or, if it be my head bookes-man,[141]
      Aggrieved he shal bee:
    For no man here within my howse,
      Shall doe wrong unto thee.

    O, it is not your head bookes-man,                                45
      Nor none of his degree:
    But, on to-morrow ere it be noone[142]
      All deemed[143] to die are yee.

    And of that bethank your head stewàrd,
      And thank your gay ladie.                                       50
    If this be true, my litle foot-page,
      The heyre of my land thoust bee.

    If it be not true, my dear mastèr,
      No good death let me die.
    If it be not true, thou litle foot-page,                          55
      A dead corse shalt thou lie.[144]

    O call now downe my faire ladye,
      O call her downe to mee:
    And tell my ladye gay how sicke,
      And like to die I bee.                                          60

    Downe then came his ladye faire,
      All clad in purple and pall:
    The rings that were on her fingèrs,
      Cast light thorrow the hall.

    What is your will, my owne wed-lord?                              65
      What is your will with mee?
    O see, my ladye deere, how sicke,
      And like to die I bee.

    And thou be sicke, my own wed-lord,
      Soe sore it grieveth me:                                        70
    But my five maydens and myselfe
      Will "watch thy" bedde for thee:[145]

    And at the waking of your first sleepe,
      We will a hott drinke make:
    And at the waking of your "next" sleepe,[146]                     75
      Your sorrowes we will slake.

    He put a silk cote on his backe,
      And mail of manye a fold:
    And hee putt a steele cap on his head,
      Was gilt with good red gold.                                    80

    He layd a bright browne sword by his side,
      And another att his feete:
    "And twentye good knights he placed at hand,
      To watch him in his sleepe."

    And about the middle time of the night,                           85
      Came twentye-four traitours inn:
    Sir Giles he was the foremost man,
      The leader of that ginn.[147]

    Old Robin with his bright browne sword,
      Sir Gyles head soon did winn:                                   90
    And scant of all those twenty-four,
      Went out one quick[148] agenn.

    None save only a litle foot page,
      Crept forth at a window of stone:
    And he had two armes when he came in,                             95
      And he went back with one.

    Upp then came that ladie gaye
      With torches burning bright:
    She thought to have brought sir Gyles a drinke,
      Butt she found her owne wedd knight.                           100

    The first thinge that she stumbled on
      It was sir Gyles his foote:
    Sayes, Ever alacke, and woe is mee!
      Here lyes my sweete hart-roote.

    The next thinge that she stumbled on                             105
      It was sir Gyles his heade;
    Sayes, Ever, alacke, and woe is me!
      Heere lyes my true love deade.

    Hee cutt the pappes beside her brest,
      And did her body spille;[149]                                  110
    He cutt the eares beside her heade,
      And bade her love her fille.

    He called then up his litle foot-page,
      And made him there his heyre;
    And sayd henceforth my worldlye goodes                           115
      And countrye I forsweare.

    He shope[150] the crosse on his right shouldèr,
      Of the white "clothe" and the redde,[151]
    And went him into the holy land,
      Wheras Christ was quicke and dead.                             120

       *       *       *       *       *


[The following is the original ballad from the Folio MS. ed. Hales and
Furnivall, vol. i. p. 235.

    God! let neuer soe old a man
    marry so yonge a wiffe
    as did old Robin of portingale!
    he may rue all the dayes of his liffe.                             4

    ffor the Maiors daughter of Lin, god wott,
    he chose her to his wife,
    & thought to haue liued in quiettnesse
    with her all the dayes of his liffe.                               8

    they had not in their wed bed laid,
    scarcly were both on sleepe,
    but vpp shee rose, & forth shee goes
    to Sir Gyles, & fast can weepe,                                   12

    Saies, "sleepe you, wake you, faire Sir Gyles,
    or be not you within?"

    "but I am waking, sweete," he said,
    "Lady, what is your will?"                                        16
    "I haue vnbethought me of a will,
    how my wed Lord we shall spill.

    "24 knights, she sayes,
    that dwells about this towne,                                     20
    eene 24 of my Next Cozens,
    will helpe to dinge him downe."

    with that beheard his litle foote page
    as he was watering his Masters steed,                             24
    Soe s * * * *
    his verry heart did bleed;

    he mourned, sist, and wept full sore;
    I sweare by the holy roode,                                       28
    the teares he for his Master wept
    were blend water & bloude.

    with that beheard his deare Master
    as in his garden sate,                                            32
    says, "euer alacke my litle page!
    what causes thee to weepe?

    "hath any one done to thee wronge,
    any of thy fellowes here,                                         36
    or is any of thy good friends dead
    which makes thee shed such teares?

    "or if it be my head bookes man,
    grieued againe he shalbe,                                         40
    nor noe man within my howse
    shall doe wrong vnto thee."

    "but it is not your head bookes man,
    nor none of his degree,                                           44
    but or to morrow, ere it be Noone,
    you are deemed to die;

    "& of that thanke your head Steward,
    & after your gay Ladie."                                          48
    "If it be true, my little foote page,
    Ile make thee heyre of all my land."

    "if it be not true, my deare Master,
    god let me neuer dye."                                            52
    "if it be not true, thou little foot page,
    a dead corse shalt thou be."

    he called downe his head kookes man,
    cooke in kitchen super to dresse:                                 56
    "all & anon, my deare Master,
    anon at your request."

    "& call you downe my faire Lady,
    this night to supp with mee."                                     60

    & downe then came that fayre Lady,
    was cladd all in purple & palle,
    the rings that were vpon her fingers
    cast light thorrow the hall.                                      64

    "What is your will, my owne wed Lord,
    what is your will with mee?"
    "I am sicke, fayre Lady,
    sore sicke, & like to dye."                                       68

    "but & you be sicke, my owne wed Lord,
    soe sore it greiueth mee,
    but my 5 maydens & my selfe
    will goe & make your bedd,                                        72

    "& at the wakening of your first sleepe,
    you shall haue a hott drinke Made,
    & at the wakening of your first sleepe
    your sorrowes will haue a slake."                                 76

    he put a silke cote on his backe,
    was 13 inches folde,
    & put a steele cap vpon his head,
    was gilded with good red gold;                                    80

    & he layd a bright browne sword by his side,
    & another att his ffeete,
    & full well knew old Robin then
    whether he shold wake or sleepe.                                  84

    & about the Middle time of the Night
    came 24 good knights in,
    Syr Gyles he was the formost man,
    soe well he knew that ginne.                                      88

    Old Robin with a bright browne sword
    Sir Gyles head he did winne,
    soe did he all those 24,
    neuer a one went quicke out [agen;]                               92

    none but one litle foot page
    crept forth at a window of stone,
    & he had 2 armes when he came in
    And [when he went out he had none].                               96

    Vpp then came that Ladie bright
    with torches burning light;
    shee thought to haue brought Sir Gyles a drinke,
    but shee found her owne wedd Knight,                             100

    & the first thinge that this Ladye stumbled vpon,
    was of Sir Gyles his ffoote,
    sayes, "euer alacke, and woe is me,
    heere lyes my sweete hart roote!"                                104

    & the 2^d thing that this Ladie stumbled on,
    was of Sir Gyles his head,
    sayes, "euer alacke, and woe is me,
    heere lyes my true loue deade!"                                  108

    hee cutt the papps beside he[r] brest,
    & bad her wish her will,
    & he cutt the eares beside her heade,
    & bade her wish on still.                                        112

    "Mickle is the mans blood I haue spent
    to doe thee & me some good,"
    sayes, "euer alacke, my fayre Lady,
    I thinke that I was woode?"                                      116

    he calld then vp his litle foote page,
    & made him heyre of all his land,
    & he shope the crosse in his right sholder
    of the white flesh & the redd.                                   120
    & he sent him into the holy land
    wheras Christ was quicke & dead.

                                                                ffins.]

FOOTNOTES:

[137] Ver. 19. _unbethought_, (properly _onbethought_) this word is
still used in the Midland counties in the same sense as _bethought_.

[138] [spoil or kill.]

[139] [knock.]

[140] V. 32. blend, MS.

[141] [clerk.]

[142] Ver. 47. or to-morrow, MS.

[143] [doomed.]

[144] V. 56. bee, MS.

[145] Ver. 72. make the, MS.

[146] V. 75. first, MS.

[147] [snare.]

[148] [alive.]

[149] Ver. 118. fleshe, MS.

[150] [shaped.]

[151] Every person who went on a _Croisade_ to the Holy Land, usually
wore a cross on his upper garment, on the right shoulder, as a badge
of his profession. Different nations were distinguished by crosses
of different colours: The English wore white; the French red; &c.
This circumstance seems to be confounded in the ballad. (V. Spelman,
_Gloss_.)




IX.

CHILD WATERS.


_Child_ is frequently used by our old writers, as a Title. It is
repeatedly given to Prince Arthur in the Fairie Queen: and the son
of a king is in the same poem called "Child Tristram." (B. 5. c. 11.
st. 8. 13.--B. 6. c. 2. st. 36.--_Ibid._ c. 8. st. 15.) In an old
ballad quoted in Shakespeare's _K. Lear_, the hero of Ariosto is
called _Child Roland_. Mr. Theobald supposes this use of the word
was received along with their romances from the Spaniards, with whom
_Infante_ signifies a "Prince." A more eminent critic tells us, that
"in the old times of chivalry, the noble youth, who were candidates for
knighthood, during the time of their probation were called _Infans_,
_Varlets_, _Damoysels_, _Bacheliers_. The most noble of the youth were
particularly called _Infans_." (Vid. Warb. Shakesp.) A late commentator
on Spenser observes, that the Saxon word cniht, knight, signifies also
a "child." (See Upton's gloss to the F. Q.)

The Editor's folio MS. whence the following piece is taken (with some
corrections), affords several other ballads, wherein the word _Child_
occurs as a title: but in none of these it signifies "Prince." See the
song intitled _Gil Morrice_, in this volume.

It ought to be observed, that the Word _Child_ or _Chield_ is still
used in North Britain to denominate a Man, commonly with some
contemptuous character affixed to him, but sometimes to denote Man in
general.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [This ballad gives us a curious insight into ancient manners, and
  shows what were our forefathers' notions of the perfection of
  female character. They would have agreed with the propounder of
  the question--What is woman's mission? answer, sub-mission. Like
  patient Grissel, Ellen bears worse sufferings than the Nut-Brown
  Maid has to hear of, and in spite of the worst usage she never
  swerves from her devotion. This English version was the first
  published, but the story is the same as _Lai le Frêne_, preserved
  in English in the Auchinleck MS. and in Norman in the _Lais_ of
  Marie, which were written about the year 1250.

  Jamieson (_Popular Ballads and Songs_, 1806, vol. i. p. 113)
  published his Scottish version under the more appropriate name
  of _Burd Ellen_, who is the real heroine rather than the ruffian
  Waters is the hero. Adopting the idea of Mrs. Hampden Pye, who
  wrote a ballad on the same subject, he changes the character of the
  catastrophe by adding three concluding stanzas to wind up the story
  in an unhappy manner. Another version of the ballad, which ends
  happily, is given in Kinloch's _Ancient Scottish Ballads_ under the
  title of Lady Margaret. A German version of this ballad was made by
  the poet Bürger.]

       *       *       *       *       *

    Childe Waters in his stable stoode
      And stroakt his milke white steede
    To him a fayre yonge ladye came[152]
      As ever ware womans weede.[153]

    Sayes, Christ you save, good Childe Waters;                        5
      Sayes, Christ you save, and see:
    My girdle of gold that was too longe,[154]
      Is now too short for mee.

    And all is with one chyld of yours,
      I feele sturre att my side;                                     10
    My gowne of greene it is too straighte;
      Before, it was too wide.

    If the child be mine, faire Ellen, he sayd,
    Be mine as you tell mee;
    Then take you Cheshire and Lancashire both,[155]                  15
    Take them your owne to bee.

    If the childe be mine, faire Ellen, he sayd,
      Be mine, as you doe sweare:
    Then take you Cheshire and Lancashire both,
      And make that child your heyre.                                 20

    Shee saies, I had rather have one kisse,
      Child Waters, of thy mouth;
    Than I wolde have Cheshire and Lancashire both,
      That lye by north and south.[156]

    And I had rather have one twinkling,[157]                         25
      Childe Waters, of thine ee:[158]
    Then I wolde have Cheshire and Lancashire both
      To take them mine owne to bee.

    To morrow, Ellen, I must forth ryde
      Farr into the north countrie;[159]                              30
    The fairest lady that I can find,
      Ellen, must goe with mee.

    [Thoughe I am not that lady fayre,
      Yet let me go with thee.]
    And ever I pray you, Child Watèrs,                                35
      Your foot-page let me bee.

    If you will my foot-page be, Ellèn,
      As you doe tell to mee;[160]
    Then you must cut your gowne of greene,
      An inch above your knee:                                        40

    Soe must you doe your yellowe lockes,
      An inch above your ee:[161]
    You must tell no man what is my name;
      My foot-page then you shall bee.

    Shee, all the long day Child Waters rode,[162]                    45
      Ran barefoote by his side;[163]
    Yett was he never so courteous a knighte,
      To say, Ellen, will you ryde?

    Shee, all the long day Child Waters rode,[164]
      Ran barefoote thorow the broome;[165]                           50
    Yett hee was never soe curteous a knighte,
      To say, put on your shoone.[166]

    Ride softlye, shee sayd, O Childe Waters,[167]
      Why doe you ryde soe fast?
    The childe, which is no mans but thine,[168]                      55
      My bodye itt will brast.[169]

    Hee sayth, seest thou yonder water, Ellen,[170]
      That flows from banke to brimme.--
    I trust to God, O Child Waters,[171]
      You never will see[172] mee swimme.                             60

    But when shee came to the waters side,
      Shee sayled to the chinne:
    Except the Lord of heaven be my speed,
      Now must I learne to swimme.

    The salt waters bare up her clothes;[173]                         65
      Our Ladye bare upp her chinne:
    Childe Waters was a woe man, good Lord,[174]
      To see faire Ellen swimme.

    And when shee over the water was,
      Shee then came to his knee:                                     70
    He said, Come hither, thou faire Ellèn,[175]
      Loe yonder what I see.

    Seest thou not yonder hall, Ellèn?
      Of redd gold shines the yate:[176]
    Of twenty foure faire ladyes there,[177]                          75
      The fairest is my mate.[178]

    Seest thou not yonder hall, Ellèn?
      Of redd gold shines the towre:[179]
    There are twenty four faire ladyes there,[180]
      The fairest is my paramoure.                                    80

    I see the hall now, Child Waters,[181]
      Of redd gold shines the yate:[182]
    God give you good now of yourselfe,[183]
      And of your worthye mate.[184]

    I see the hall now, Child Waters,[181]                            85
      Of redd golde shines the towre:[182]
    God give you good now of yourselfe,[183]
      And of your paramoure.

    There twenty four fayre ladyes were[185]
      A playing att the ball:[186]                                    90
    And Ellen the fairest ladye there,[187]
      Must bring his steed to the stall.

    There twenty four fayre ladyes were[188]
      A playinge at the chesse;[189]
    And Ellen the fayrest ladye there,[190]                           95
      Must bring his horse to gresse.[191]

    And then bespake Childe Waters sister,
      These were the wordes said shee:[192]
    You have the prettyest foot-page, brother,
      That ever I saw with mine ee.[193]                             100

    But that his bellye it is soe bigg,
      His girdle goes wonderous hie:
    And let him, I pray you, Childe Watèrs,[194]
      Goe into the chamber with mee.[195]

    [It is not fit for a little foot-page,                           105
      That has run throughe mosse and myre,
    To go into the chamber with any ladye.
      That weares soe riche attyre.]

    It is more meete for a litle foot-page,
      That has run throughe mosse and myre.                          110
    To take his supper upon his knee,
      And sitt downe by the kitchen fyer.[196]

    But when they had supped every one,
      To bedd they tooke theyr waye:[197]
    He sayd, come hither, my little foot-page,                       115
      And hearken what I saye.[198]

    Goe thee downe into yonder towne,[199]
      And low into the street;
    The fayrest ladye that thou can finde,
      Hyer her in mine armes to sleepe,                              120
    And take her up in thine armes twaine,[200]
      For filinge[201] of her feete.

    Ellen is gone into the towne,
      And low into the streete:
    The fairest ladye that shee cold find,                           125
      Shee hyred in his armes to sleepe;
    And tooke her up in her armes twayne,[202]
      For filing of her feete.

    I praye you nowe, good Childe Watèrs,
      Let mee lye at your bedds feete:[203]                          130
    For there is noe place about this house,
      Where I may 'saye a slepe[204].

    [He gave her leave, and faire Ellèn
      Down at his beds feet laye:]
    This done the nighte drove on apace,[205]                        135
      And when it was neare the daye,[205]

    Hee sayd, Rise up, my litle foot-page,
      Give my steede corne and haye;[206]
    And soe doe thou the good black oats,
      To carry mee better awaye.[207]                                140

    Up then rose the faire Ellèn[208]
      And gave his steede corne and hay:
    And soe shee did the good blacke oates,[209]
      To carry him the better away.[210]

    Shee leaned her backe to the manger side,[211]                   145
      And grievouslye did groane:
    [Shee leaned her back to the manger side,
      And there shee made her moane.]

    And that beheard his mother deere,
      Shee heard her there monand.[212]                              150
    Shee sayd, Rise up, thou Child Watèrs,
      I think thee a cursed man.[213]

    For in thy stable is a ghost,[214]
      That grievouslye doth grone.
    Or else some woman laboures of childe,                           155
      She is soe woe-begone.

    Up then rose Childe Waters soon,[215]
      And did on his shirte of silke;
    And then he put on his other clothes,[216]
      On his body as white as milke.                                 160

    And when he came to the stable dore,
      Full still there hee did stand,[217]
    That hee mighte heare his fayre Ellèn,[218]
      Howe shee made her monànd[219].

    She sayd, Lullabye, mine owne deere child,[220]                  165
      Lullabye, dere child, dere:
    I wold thy father were a king,
      Thy mother layd on a biere.

    Peace now, hee said, good faire Ellèn.
      Be of good cheere, I praye;[221]                               170
    And the bridal and the churching both
      Shall bee upon one day.[222]

FOOTNOTES:

[152] [Ver. 3. to him came, MS.]

[153] [V. 4. as ere did weare, MS.]

[154] [V. 7. which was. MS.]

[155] V. 15. then not in MS.

[156] [V. 24. that lyes.]

[157] [V. 25. have a.]

[158] [V. 26. of your eye.]

[159] [V. 30. soe ffarr.]

[160] [V. 38. tell itt mee.]

[161] [V. 42. another inch above your eye. MS.]

[162] [Ver. 45. all this long. _Shee_ not in MS.]

[163] [V. 46. shee ran.]

[164] [V. 49. but all this day.]

[165] [V. 50. shee ran.]

[166] [V. 52. as to say.]

[167] [V. 53. _O_ not in MS.]

[168] [V. 55. but yours.]

[169] [V. 56. burst.]

[170] [V. 57. he sayes, sees.]

[171] [V. 59. Child Waters, shee said.]

[172] _i.e._ permit, suffer, &c.

[173] [V. 65. Ellen's clothes.]

[174] [V. 67. and Child Waters.]

[175] [V. 71. _thou_ not in MS.]

[176] [Ver. 74. shine the yates. MS.]

[177] [V. 75. theres 24 ffayre ladyes.]

[178] [V. 76. the ffairest is my worldlye make.]

[179] [V. 78. Shineth.]

[180] [V. 79. there is 24 ffaire ladyes.]

[181] [V. 81, 85. I doe see.]

[182] [V. 82, 86. that of redd gold shineth the yates.]

[183] [V. 83, 87. God give good then.]

[184] [V. 84. worldlye make.]

[185] [V. 89. there were 24 ladyes.]

[186] [V. 90. were playing.]

[187] [V. 91. Ellen was the fairest ladye.]

[188] [V. 93. there were.]

[189] [V. 94. was playing.]

[190] [V. 95. shee was the ffairest ladye.]

[191] [V. 96. grasse.]

[192] [V. 98. and these.]

[193] [V. 100. eye. MS.]

[194] [Ver. 103. and ever I pray. MS.]

[195] [V. 104. let him goe.]

[196] [After V. 112 the two lines

    then goe into the chamber with any ladye
    that weares soe ... attyre

occur in the MS.]

[197] [V. 114. they waye.]

[198] [V. 116. hearken what I doe say.]

[199] [V. 117. and goe thy.]

[200] [V. 121. armes 2. MS.]

[201] _i.e._ defiling. See Warton's _Observ._ vol. ii. p. 158.

[202] [V. 127. and tooke her in her armes 2.]

[203] [V. 130. that I may creape in att.]

[204] Ver. 132. _i.e._ essay, attempt

[205] [V. 135-6.

    this and itt drove now afterward
    till itt was neere the day.]

[206] [V. 138. and give.]

[207] [V. 140. that he may carry me the better away.]

[208] [V. 141. and up then rose the.]

[209] [V. 143. did on.]

[210] [V. 144. that he might carry him.]

[211] [V. 145. she layned.]

[212] [V. 150. and heard her make her moane.]

[213] [V. 152. I think thou art a. MS.]

[214] [Ver. 153. for yonder is a ghost in thy stable.]

[215] [V. 157. but up then rose Childe Waters.]

[216] [V. 159. _and_ not in MS.]

[217] [V. 162. full still that.]

[218] [V. 163. heare now faire.]

[219] _sic_ in MS., _i.e._ moaning, bemoaning, &c.

[220] [V. 165. my owne.]

[221] [V. 170. and be of good cheere I thee pray.]

[222] [V. 172. they shall, MS.]




X.

PHILLIDA AND CORYDON.


This Sonnet is given from a small quarto MS. in the Editor's
possession, written in the time of Q. Elizabeth. Another Copy of it
containing some variations, is reprinted in the _Muses' Library_,
p. 295, from an ancient miscellany, intitled _England's Helicon_,
1600, 4to. The author was _Nicholas Breton_, a writer of some fame
in the reign of Elizabeth; who also published an interlude intitled
_An old man's lesson and a young man's love_, 4to., and many other
little pieces in prose and verse, the titles of which may be seen in
Winstanley, Ames' _Typog._ and Osborne's _Harl. Catalog._ &c.--He
is mentioned with great respect by _Meres_, in his 2d pt. of _Wit's
Common-wealth_, 1598, f. 283, and is alluded to in Beaumont and
Fletcher's _Scornful Lady_, act ii., and again in _Wit without Money_,
act iii.--See Whalley's _Ben Jonson_, vol. iii. p. 103.

The present Edition is improved by a copy in _England's Helicon_, edit.
1614, 8vo.

This little Pastoral is one of the Songs in "The Honourable
Entertainment gieven to the Queenes Majestie in Progresse at Elvetham
in Hampshire, by the R. H. the Earle of Hertford, 1591, 4to." (Printed
by Wolfe. No name of author.) See in that pamphlet,

                   "The thirde daies Entertainment.

"On Wednesday morning about 9 o'clock, as her Majestie opened a
casement of her gallerie window, ther were 3 excellent musitians,
who being disguised in auncient country attire, did greet her with a
pleasant song of _Corydon and Phillida_, made in 3 parts of purpose.
The song, as well for the worth of the dittie as the aptnesse of the
note thereto applied, it pleased her Highnesse after it had been once
sung to command it againe, and highly to grace it with her cheerefull
acceptance and commendation.

                          THE PLOWMAN'S SONG.

    _In the merrie month of May, &c."_

The splendour and magnificence of Elizabeth's reign is nowhere more
strongly painted than in these little diaries of some of her summer
excursions to the houses of her nobility; nor could a more acceptable
present be given to the world, than a republication of a select number
of such details as this of the entertainment at _Elvetham_, that at
_Killingworth_, &c., &c., which so strongly mark the spirit of the
times, and present us with scenes so very remote from modern manners.

Since the above was written, the public hath been gratified with a most
compleat work on the foregoing subject, intitled, _The Progresses and
Public Processions of Queen Elizabeth, &c. By John Nichols, F.A.S.,
Edinb. and Perth_, 1788, 2 vols. 4to.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [The author of this elegant little poem was a most voluminous
  author, and "is supposed to be the same Capt. Nicholas Breton,
  who was of Norton in Northamptonshire, and dying there June 22,
  1624, has a monument in that church."[223] Dr. Rimbault (_Musical_
  _Illustrations of Percy's Reliques_) writes as follows of the
  music:--"We have here two settings of this beautiful pastoral,
  the first as it was sung by the 'three excellent musitians'
  before Queen Elizabeth in 1591; the second as it was reset in the
  following century. The first is extracted from _Madrigals to 3,
  4, and 5 parts, apt for viols and voices_, newly composed by
  Michael Este, 1604; the second from _Cheerfull Ayres or Ballads,
  set for three voyces_, by Dr. John Wilson, Oxford, 1660. The latter
  became extremely popular, and is included in D'Urfey's _Pills to
  Purge Melancholy_, 1719, and several other musical miscellanies of
  subsequent date."]

       *       *       *       *       *

    In the merrie moneth of Maye,
    In a morne by break of daye,
    With a troope of damselles playing
    Forthe "I yode" forsooth a maying:[224]

    When anon by a wood side,                                          5
    Where as Maye was in his pride,
    I espied all alone
    Phillida and Corydon.

    Much adoe there was, god wot;
    He wold love, and she wold not.                                   10
    She sayde, never man was trewe;
    He sayes, none was false to you.

    He sayde, hee had lovde her longe:
    She sayes, love should have no wronge.
    Corydon wold kisse her then:                                      15
    She sayes, maydes must kisse no men,

    Tyll they doe for good and all.
    When she made the shepperde call
    All the heavens to wytnes truthe,
    Never loved a truer youthe.                                       20

    Then with manie a prettie othe,
    Yea and nay, and, faith and trothe;
    Suche as seelie shepperdes use
    When they will not love abuse;

    Love, that had bene long deluded,                                 25
    Was with kisses sweete concluded;
    And Phillida with garlands gaye
    Was made the lady of the Maye.

FOOTNOTES:

[223] [England's _Helicon_ (Brydges' _British Bibliographer_, vol.
iii.)]

[224] Ver. 4. the wode, MS.




XI.

LITTLE MUSGRAVE AND LADY BARNARD.


This ballad is ancient, and has been popular; we find it quoted in many
old plays. See Beaum. and Fletcher's _Knight of the Burning Pestle_,
4to. 1613, act v. sc. iii. _The Varietie, a comedy_, 12mo. 1649, act
iv. &c. In Sir William Davenant's play, _The Witts_, a. iii. a gallant
thus boasts of himself:

    "Limber and sound! besides I sing Musgrave,
    And for Chevy-chace no lark comes near me."

In the Pepys _Collection_, vol. iii. p. 314, is an imitation of this
old song, in 33 stanzas, by a more modern pen, with many alterations,
but evidently for the worse.

This is given from an old printed copy in the British Museum, with
corrections; some of which are from a fragment in the Editor's folio
MS. It is also printed in Dryden's _Collection of Miscellaneous_
_Poems_.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [The copy of this ballad in the Folio MS. (ed. Hales and Furnivall,
  vol. i. p. 119) is a mutilated fragment consisting of only ten
  complete stanzas and three half ones. The oldest entire copy is
  to be found in _Wit Restor'd_, 1658, where it is called _the_ old
  _ballad of little Musgrave_, which is given by Professor Child
  (_English and Scottish Ballads_, vol. ii. p. 15) in preference
  to Percy's. This version, not very exactly transcribed, is printed
  in Dryden's _Miscellany Poems_ (1716, vol. iii. 312), and Ritson
  (_Ancient Songs and Ballads_, vol. ii. p. 116) copied it from
  thence. Ritson writes of one of Percy's statements above: "Dr.
  Percy indeed, by some mistake, gives it as from an old printed copy
  in the British Museum; observing that 'In the Pepys collection is
  an imitation of this old song in a different measure, by a more
  modern pen, with many alterations, but evidently for the worse.' It
  is very true, and not less so that the only copies in the museum
  (for there are two) are more recent impressions of this identical
  _imitation_."

  It is the 14th stanza slightly altered which is quoted in the
  _Knight of the Burning Pestle_.

    "And some they whistled, and some they sung,
                      Hey down down!
    And some did loudly say
    Ever as Lord Barnet's horn blew,
                      Away Musgrave, away."

  There are several Scottish versions, in which the reciters have
  altered the locality. Jamieson has printed one which he calls _Lord
  Barnaby_ (_Popular Ballads and Songs_, i. 170). He states that
  he had heard it repeated both in Morayshire and in the southern
  counties.

  Motherwell gives the air in his _Minstrelsy_ which he noted down
  from oral communication, and this verse--

    "It fell upon a Martinmas time
      When the nobles were a drinking wine,
    That little Mushiegrove to the kirk he did go
      For to see the ladies come in."

  Mr. J. H. Dixon includes a version entitled _Lord Burnett and_
  _Little Munsgrove_ in his Scottish Traditional Versions of Ancient
  Ballads (Percy Society, vol. xvii.)

  Home adopted the name of Lady Barnard in his _Douglas_ before he
  took that of Lady Randolph, see No. 18, Gil Morrice.

  There is another ballad called _The Bonny Birdy_, with a similar
  story. Jamieson (i. 162) prints it and alters the title to _Lord_
  _Randal_.]

       *       *       *       *       *

    As it fell out on a highe holye daye,
      As many bee in the yeare,
    When yong men and maides together do goe
      Their masses and mattins to heare,

    Little Musgràve came to the church door,                           5
      The priest was at the mass;
    But he had more mind of the fine womèn,
      Then he had of our Ladyes grace.

    And some of them were clad in greene,
      And others were clad in pall;                                   10
    And then came in my lord Barnardes wife,
      The fairest among them all.

    Shee cast an eye on little Musgràve
      As bright as the summer sunne:
    O then bethought him little Musgràve,                             15
      This ladyes heart I have wonne.

    Quoth she, I have loved thee, little Musgràve,
      Fulle long and manye a daye.
    So have I loved you, ladye faire,
      Yet word I never durst saye.                                    20

    I have a bower at Bucklesford-Bury,[225]
      Full daintilye bedight,
    If thoult wend thither, my little Musgràve,
      Thoust lig in mine armes all night.

    Quoth hee, I thanke yee, ladye faire,                             25
      This kindness yee shew to mee;
    And whether it be to my weale or woe,
      This night will I lig with thee.

    All this beheard a litle foot-page,
      By his ladyes coach as he ranne:                                30
    Quoth he, thoughe I am my ladyes page,
      Yet Ime my lord Barnardes manne.

    My lord Barnàrd shall knowe of this,
      Although I lose a limbe.
    And ever whereas the bridges were broke,                          35
      He layd him downe to swimme.

    Asleep or awake, thou lord Barnàrd,
      As thou art a man of life,
    Lo! this same night at Bucklesford-Bury
      Litle Musgrave's in bed with thy wife.                          40

    If it be trew, thou litle foote-page,
      This tale thou hast told to mee,
    Then all my lands in Bucklesford-Bury
      I freelye will give to thee.

    But and it be a lye, thou litle foot-page,                        45
      This tale thou hast told to mee,
    On the highest tree in Bucklesford-Bury
      All hanged shalt thou bee.

    Rise up, rise up, my merry men all,
      And saddle me my good steede;                                   50
    This night must I to Bucklesford-bury;
      God wott, I had never more neede.

    Then some they whistled, and some they sang,
      And some did loudlye saye,
    Whenever lord Barnardes horne it blewe,                           55
      Awaye, Musgràve, away.

    Methinkes I heare the throstle cocke,
      Methinkes I heare the jay,
    Methinkes I heare lord Barnards home;
      I would I were awaye.                                           60

    Lye still, lye still, thou little Musgràve,
      And huggle me from the cold;
    For it is but some shephardes boye
      A whistling his sheepe to the fold.[226]

    Is not thy hawke upon the pearche,                                65
      Thy horse eating corne and haye?
    And thou a gay lady within thine armes:
      And wouldst thou be awaye?

    By this lord Barnard was come to the dore,
      And lighted upon a stone:                                       70
    And he pulled out three silver keyes,
      And opened the dores eche one.

    He lifted up the coverlett,
      He lifted up the sheete;
    How now, how now, thou little Musgràve,                           75
      Dost find my gaye ladye sweete?

    I find her sweete, quoth little Musgràve,
      The more is my griefe and paine;
    Ide gladlye give three hundred poundes
      That I were on yonder plaine.                                   80

    Arise, arise, thou little Musgràve,
      And put thy cloathes nowe on,
    It shall never be said in my countree,
      That I killed a naked man.

    I have two swordes in one scabbàrde,                              85
      Full deare they cost my purse;
    And thou shalt have the best of them,
      And I will have the worse.

    The first stroke that little Musgrave strucke,
      He hurt lord Barnard sore;                                      90
    The next stroke that lord Barnard strucke,
      Little Musgrave never strucke more.

    With that bespake the ladye faire,
      In bed whereas she laye,
    Althoughe thou art dead, my little Musgràve,                      95
      Yet for thee I will praye:

    And wishe well to thy soule will I,
      So long as I have life;
    So will I not do for thee, Barnàrd,
      Thoughe I am thy wedded wife.                                  100

    He cut her pappes from off her brest;
      Great pitye it was to see
    The drops of this fair ladyes bloode
      Run trickling downe her knee.

    Wo worth, wo worth ye, my merrye men all,                        105
      You never were borne for my goode:
    Why did you not offer to stay my hande,
      When you sawe me wax so woode?[227]

    For I have slaine the fairest sir knighte,
      That ever rode on a steede;                                    110
    So have I done the fairest lady,
      That ever ware womans weede.[228]

    A grave, a grave, Lord Barnard cryde,
      To putt these lovers in;
    But lay my ladye o' the upper hande,                             115
      For she comes o' the better kin.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [+±+] That the more modern copy is to be dated about the middle of
  the last century, will be readily conceived from the tenor of the
  concluding stanza, viz.

    "This sad Mischief by Lust was wrought;
      Then let us call for Grace,
    That we may shun the wicked vice,
      And fly from Sin a-pace."

FOOTNOTES:

[225] Bucklefield-berry, fol. MS.

[226] Ver. 64. Is whistling sheepe ore the mold, fol. MS.

[227] [wildly angry.]

[228] [See the last stanza of _Childe Maurice_ from Folio MS., book i.
No. 18, which is almost identical with this.]




XII.

THE EW-BUGHTS, MARION.


                            A SCOTTISH SONG.

This sonnet appears to be ancient: that and its simplicity of sentiment
have recommended it to a place here.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [This is marked in Ramsay's _Tea Table Miscellany_ as an old song
  with additions. It is not known who wrote the song or who composed
  the air belonging to it. They are both old.]

       *       *       *       *       *

    Will ye gae to the ew-bughts,[229] Marion,
      And wear in[230] the sheip wi' mee?
    The sun shines sweit, my Marion,
      But nae half sae sweit as thee.
    O Marion's a bonnie lass;                                          5
      And the blyth blinks[231] in her ee:
    And fain wad I marrie Marion,
      Gin Marion wad marrie mee.

    Theire's gowd in your garters, Marion;
      And siller on your white hauss-bane[232]:                       10
    Fou faine wad I kisse my Marion
      At eene quhan I cum hame.
    Theire's braw lads in Earnslaw, Marion,
      Quha gape and glowr wi' their ee
    At kirk, quhan they see my Marion;                                15
      Bot nane of them lues[233] like mee.

    Ive nine milk-ews, my Marion,
      A cow and a brawney quay;[234]
    Ise gie tham au to my Marion,
      Just on her bridal day.                                         20
    And yees get a grein sey[235] apron,
      And waistcote o' London broun;
    And wow bot ye will be vaporing
      Quhaneir ye gang to the toun.

    Ime yong and stout, my Marion,                                    25
      None dance lik mee on the greine;
    And gin ye forsak me, Marion,
      Ise een gae draw up wi' Jeane.
    Sae put on your pearlins,[236] Marion,
      And kirtle oth' cramasie;[237]                                  30
    And sune as my chin has nae haire on,
      I sall cum west, and see yee.

FOOTNOTES:

[229] [the pens in which the ewes are milked.]

[230] [gather in.]

[231] [joy sparkles.]

[232] _Hauss bane, i.e._ The neck-bone. Marion had probably a silver
locket on, tied close to her neck with a ribband, an usual ornament
in Scotland; where a sore throat is called "_a sair hause_," properly
_halse_.

[233] [loves.]

[234] [young heifer.]

[235] [woollen cloth.]

[236] [a kind of lace made of thread or silk.]

[237] [crimson.]




XIII.

THE KNIGHT, AND SHEPHERD'S DAUGHTER.


This ballad (given from an old black-letter copy, with some
corrections) was popular in the time of Q. Elizabeth, being usually
printed with her picture before it, as Hearne informs us in his preface
to _Gul. Neubrig. Hist. Oxon._ 1719, 8vo. vol. i. p. lxx. It is
quoted in Fletcher's comedy of the _Pilgrim_, act iv. sc. 2.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [It is also quoted in _The Knight of the Burning Pestle_:

    "He set her on a milk white steed." (l. 85.)

  There are several Scottish versions given by Buchan, Kinloch,
  and Motherwell. The latter claims greater antiquity for his over
  Percy's. It appears, however, to be a southern ballad adapted
  by the Scotch and improved in its humour. The heroine practices
  various artifices to maintain the character of a "beggar's brat"
  when riding back with _Earl Richard_.]

       *       *       *       *       *

    There was a shepherd's daughter
      Came tripping on the waye;
    And there by chance a knighte shee mett,
      Which caused her to staye.

    Good morrowe to you, beauteous maide,                              5
      These words pronounced hee:
    O I shall dye this daye, he sayd,
      If Ive not my wille of thee.

    The Lord forbid, the maide replyde,
      That you shold waxe so wode!                                    10
    "But for all that shee could do or saye,
      He wold not be withstood."

    Sith you have had your wille of mee,
      And put me to open shame,
    Now, if you are a courteous knighte,                              15
      Tell me what is your name?

    Some do call mee Jacke, sweet heart,
      And some do call mee Jille;[238]
    But when I come to the kings faire courte
      They call me Wilfulle Wille.                                    20

    He sett his foot into the stirrup,
      And awaye then he did ride;
    She tuckt her girdle about her middle,
      And ranne close by his side.

    But when she came to the brode watèr,                             25
      She sett her brest and swamme;
    And when she was got out againe,
      She tooke to her heels and ranne.

    He never was the courteous knighte,
      To saye, faire maide, will ye ride?                             30
    "And she was ever too loving a maide"
      To saye, sir knighte abide.

    When she came to the kings faire courte,
      She knocked at the ring;
    So readye was the king himself                                    35
      To let this faire maide in.

    Now Christ you save, my gracious liege,
      Now Christ you save and see,
    You have a knighte within your courte
      This daye hath robbed mee.                                      40

    What hath he robbed thee of, sweet heart?
      Of purple or of pall?
    Or hath he took thy gaye gold ring
      From off thy finger small?

    He hath not robbed mee, my leige,                                 45
      Of purple nor of pall:
    But he hath gotten my maiden head,
      Which grieves mee worst of all.

    Now if he be a batchelor,
      His bodye Ile give to thee;[239]                                50
    But if he be a married man,
      High hanged he shall bee.

    He called downe his merrye men all,
      By one, by two, by three;
    Sir William used to bee the first,                                55
      But nowe the last came hee.

    He brought her downe full fortye pounde,
      Tyed up withinne a glove:
    Faire maid, Ile give the same to thee;
      Go, seeke thee another love.                                    60

    O Ile have none of your gold, she sayde,
      Nor Ile have none of your fee;
    But your faire bodye I must have,
      The king hath granted mee.

    Sir William ranne and fetchd her then                             65
      Five hundred pound in golde,
    Saying, faire maide, take this to thee,
      Thy fault will never be tolde.

    Tis not the gold that shall mee tempt,
      These words then answered shee,                                 70
    But your own bodye I must have,
      The king hath granted mee.

    Would I had dranke the water cleare,
      When I did drinke the wine,
    Rather than any shepherds brat                                    75
      Shold bee a ladye of mine!

    Would I had drank the puddle foule,
      When I did drink the ale,
    Rather than ever a shepherds brat
      Shold tell me such a tale!                                      80

    A shepherds brat even as I was,
      You mote have let me bee,
    I never had come othe kings faire courte,
      To crave any love of thee.

    He sett her on a milk-white steede,                               85
      And himself upon a graye;
    He hung a bugle about his necke,
      And soe they rode awaye.

    But when they came unto the place,
      Where marriage-rites were done,                                 90
    She proved herself a dukes daughtèr,
      And he but a squires sonne.

    Now marrye me, or not, sir knight.
      Your pleasure shall be free:
    If you make me ladye of one good towne,                           95
      Ile make you lord of three.

    Ah! cursed bee the gold, he sayd.
      If thou hadst not been trewe.
    I shold have forsaken my sweet love,
      And have changed her for a newe.                               100

    And now their hearts being linked fast,
      They joyned hand in hande:
    Thus he had both purse, and person too,
      And all at his commande.

                                                                      *

FOOTNOTES:

[238] [Jill is sometimes used as a woman's name and at other times as a
man's.]

[239] [Ver. 50. _His bodye Ile give to thee._] This was agreeable to
the feudal customs: The Lord had a right to give a wife to his vassals.
See Shakespeare's _All's well that ends well_.




XIV.

THE SHEPHERD'S ADDRESS TO HIS MUSE.


This poem, originally printed from the small MS. volume, mentioned
above in No. X., has been improved by a more perfect copy in _England's
Helicon_, where the author is discovered to be _N. Breton_.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Good Muse, rocke me aslepe
      With some sweete harmony:
    This wearie eyes is not to kepe
      Thy wary company.

    Sweete Love, begon a while,
      Thou seest my heavines:                                          5
    Beautie is borne but to beguyle
      My harte of happines.

    See howe my little flocke,
      That lovde to feede on highe,                                   10
    Doe headlonge tumble downe the rocke,
      And in the valley dye.

    The bushes and the trees,
      That were so freshe and greene,
    Doe all their deintie colors leese,                               15
      And not a leafe is seene.

    The blacke birde and the thrushe,
      That made the woodes to ringe,
    With all the rest, are now at hushe,
      And not a note they singe.                                      20

    Swete Philomele, the birde
      That hath the heavenly throte,
    Doth nowe, alas! not once afforde
      Recordinge of a note.

    The flowers have had a frost,                                     25
      The herbs have loste their savoure;
    And Phillida the faire hath lost
      "For me her wonted" favour.

    Thus all these careful sights,
      So kill me in conceit;                                          30
    That now to hope upon delights,
      It is but meere deceite.

    And therefore, my sweete Muse,
      That knowest what helpe is best,
    Doe nowe thy heavenlie conninge use                               35
      To sett my harte at rest:

    And in a dreame bewraie
      What fate shal be my frende;
    Whether my life shall still decaye,
      Or when my sorrowes ende.                                       40

[Illustration]




XV.

LORD THOMAS AND FAIR ELLINOR


Is given (with corrections) from an ancient copy in black letter, in
the Pepys collection, intitled, _A tragical ballad on the unfortunate
love of lord Thomas and fair Ellinor, together with the downfall of
the browne girl_.--In the same collection may be seen an attempt to
modernize this old song, and reduce it to a different measure: A proof
of its popularity.

The reader will find a Scottish song on a similar subject to this,
towards the end of this volume, intitled, _Lord Thomas and Lady
Annet_.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [This is one of the ballads still kept in print in Seven Dials, and
  Ritson describes it as having "every appearance of being originally
  a minstrel song."

  There is a series of ballads on the same subject--

  1. _Lord Thomas and Fair Annet_, (see book iii. No. 4.)

  2. _Fair Margaret and Sweet William_, (see book ii. No. 4.)

  3. _Sweet Willie and Fair Annie_, (Jamieson's _Popular Ballads_, l.
  22.)

  The last named ballad is a combination of the first two, the first
  part being similar to _Lord Thomas_, and the second part to _Fair_
  _Margaret_.]

       *       *       *       *       *

    Lord Thomas he was a bold forrestèr,
      And a chaser of the kings deere;
    Faire Ellinor was a fine womàn,
      And lord Thomas he loved her deare.

    Come riddle my riddle, dear mother, he sayd,                       5
      And riddle us both as one;
    Whether I shall marrye with faire Ellinòr,
      And let the browne girl alone?

    The browne girl she has got houses and lands,
      Faire Ellinor she has got none,                                 10
    And therefore I charge thee on my blessìng,
      To bring me the browne girl home.

    And as it befelle on a high holidaye,
      As many there are beside,
    Lord Thomas he went to faire Ellinòr,                             15
      That should have been his bride.

    And when he came to faire Ellinors bower,
      He knocked there at the ring,
    And who was so readye as faire Ellinòr,
      To lett lord Thomas withinn.                                    20

    What newes, what newes, lord Thomas, she sayd?
      What newes dost thou bring to mee?
    I am come to bid thee to my weddìng,
      And that is bad newes for thee.

    O God forbid, lord Thomas, she sayd,                              25
      That such a thing should be done;
    I thought to have been the bride my selfe,
      And thou to have been the bridegrome.

    Come riddle my riddle, dear mother, she sayd,[240]
      And riddle it all in one;                                       30
    Whether I shall goe to lord Thomas his wedding,
      Or whether shall tarry at home?

    There are manye that are your friendes, daughtèr,
      And manye a one your foe,
    Therefore I charge you on my blessing,                            35
      To lord Thomas his wedding don't goe.

    There are manye that are my friendes, mothèr;
      But were every one my foe,
    Betide me life, betide me death,
      To lord Thomas his wedding I'ld goe.                            40

    She cloathed herself in gallant attire,
      And her merrye men all in greene;
    And as they rid through every towne,
      They took her to be some queene.

    But when she came to lord Thomas his gate,                        45
      She knocked there at the ring;
    And who was so readye as lord Thomàs,
      To lett faire Ellinor in.

    Is this your bride, fair Ellinor sayd?
      Methinks she looks wonderous browne;                            50
    Thou mightest have had as faire a womàn,
      As ever trod on the grounde.

    Despise her not, fair Ellin, he sayd,
      Despise her not unto mee;
    For better I love thy little fingèr,                              55
      Than all her whole bodèe.

    This browne bride had a little penknife,
      That was both long and sharpe,
    And betwixt the short ribs and the long,
      She prickd faire Ellinor's harte.                               60

    O Christ thee save, lord Thomas, hee sayd,
      Methinks thou lookst wonderous wan;
    Thou usedst to look with as fresh a colòur,
      As ever the sun shone on.

    Oh, art thou blind, lord Thomas? she sayd,                        65
      Or canst thou not very well see?
    Oh! dost thou not see my owne hearts bloode
      Run trickling down my knee.

    Lord Thomas he had a sword by his side;
      As he walked about the halle,                                   70
    He cut off his brides head from her shouldèrs,
      And threw it against the walle.

    He set the hilte against the grounde,
      And the point against his harte.
    There never three lovers together did meete,                      75
      That sooner againe did parte.

FOOTNOTES:

[240] Ver. 29. It should probably be, _Read me, read, &c., i.e._ Advise
me, advise.




XVI.

CUPID AND CAMPASPE.


This elegant little sonnet is found in the third act of an old play
intitled _Alexander and Campaspe_, written by John Lilye, a celebrated
writer in the time of queen Elizabeth. That play was first printed in
1591; but this copy is given from a later edition.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [These pretty epigrammatic verses occur in act iii. sc. 5. of
  Lilly's play as a song by Apelles. The first edition of _Campaspe_
  was printed in 1584, and that of 1591, mentioned above, is the
  second edition. This song, however, was omitted in all the editions
  printed before that of E. Blount (_Six Court Comedies, 1632._)]

       *       *       *       *       *

    Cupid and my Campaspe playd
    At cardes for kisses; Cupid payd:
    He stakes his quiver, bow and arrows,
    His mothers doves, and teame of sparrows;
    Loses them too; then down he throws                                5
    The coral of his lippe, the rose
    Growing on's cheek (but none knows how)
    With these, the crystal of his browe,
    And then the dimple of his chinne;
    All these did my Campaspe winne.                                  10

    At last he set her both his eyes,
    She won, and Cupid blind did rise.
      O Love! has she done this to thee?
      What shall, alas! become of mee?




XVII.

THE LADY TURNED SERVING-MAN


Is given from a written copy, containing some improvements (perhaps
modern ones), upon the popular ballad, intitled, _The famous flower of
Serving-men_: or the _Lady turned Serving-man_.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [It is printed in the _Collection of Old Ballads_ (i. 216) without
  the _improvements_. After verse 56 the first person is changed
  to the third in the original, but Percy altered this and made
  the first person run on throughout. Kinloch (_Ancient Scottish
  Ballads_, p. 95) gives a very mutilated and varied version of this
  ballad in the Scottish dress under the title of _Sweet Willie_,
  which was taken down from the recitation of an old woman in Lanark.
  There is a similar story in Swedish and Danish.]

       *       *       *       *       *

    You beauteous ladyes, great and small,
    I write unto you one and all,
    Whereby that you may understand
    What I have suffered in the land.

    I was by birth a lady faire,                                       5
    An ancient barons only heire,
    And when my good old father dyed,
    Then I became a young knightes bride.

    And there my love built me a bower,
    Bedeck'd with many a fragrant flower;                             10
    A braver bower you ne'er did see
    Then my true-love did build for mee.

    And there I livde a ladye gay,
    Till fortune wrought our loves decay;
    For there came foes so fierce a band,                             15
    That soon they over-run the land.

    They came upon us in the night,
    And brent my bower, and slew my knight;
    And trembling hid in mans array,
    I scant with life escap'd away.                                   20

    In the midst of this extremitìe,
    My servants all did from me flee:
    Thus was I left myself alone,
    With heart more cold than any stone.

    Yet though my heart was full of care,                             25
    Heaven would not suffer me to dispaire,
    Wherefore in haste I chang'd my name
    From faire Elise, to sweet Williame:

    And therewithall I cut my haire,
    Resolv'd my man's attire to weare;                                30
    And in my beaver, hose and band,
    I travell'd far through many a land.

    At length all wearied with my toil,
    I sate me downe to rest awhile;
    My heart it was so fill'd with woe,                               35
    That downe my cheeke the teares did flow.

    It chanc'd the king of that same place
    With all his lords a hunting was,
    And seeing me weepe, upon the same
    Askt who I was, and whence I came.                                40

    Then to his grace I did replye,
    I am a poore and friendlesse boye,
    Though nobly borne, nowe forc'd to bee
    A serving-man of lowe degree.

    Stand up, faire youth, the king reply'd,                          45
    For thee a service I'll provyde:
    But tell me first what thou canst do;
    Thou shalt be fitted thereunto.

    Wilt thou be usher of my hall,
    To wait upon my nobles all?                                       50
    Or wilt be taster of my wine,
    To 'tend on me when I shall dine?

    Or wilt thou be my chamberlaine,
    About my person to remaine?
    Or wilt thou be one of my guard,                                  55
    And I will give thee great reward?

    Chuse, gentle youth, said he, thy place.
    Then I reply'd, If it please your grace
    To shew such favour unto mee,
    Your chamberlaine I faine would bee.                              60

    The king then smiling gave consent,
    And straitwaye to his court I went;
    Where I behavde so faithfullìe,
    That hee great favour showd to mee.

    Now marke what fortune did provide;                               65
    The king he would a hunting ride
    With all his lords and noble traine,
    Sweet William must at home remaine.

    Thus being left alone behind,
    My former state came in my mind:                                  70
    I wept to see my mans array;
    No longer now a ladye gay.

    And meeting with a ladyes vest,
    Within the same myself I drest;
    With silken robes, and jewels rare,                               75
    I deckt me, as a ladye faire:

    And taking up a lute straitwaye,
    Upon the same I strove to play;
    And sweetly to the same did sing,
    As made both hall and chamber ring.                               80

    "My father was as brave a lord,
    As ever Europe might afford;
    My mother was a lady bright;
    My husband was a valiant knight:

    "And I myself a ladye gay,                                        85
    Bedeckt with gorgeous rich array;
    The happiest lady in the land,
    Had not more pleasure at command.

    "I had my musicke every day
    Harmonious lessons for to play;                                   90
    I had my virgins fair and free,
    Continually to wait on mee.

    "But now, alas! my husband's dead,
    And all my friends are from me fled,
    My former days are past and gone,                                 95
    And I am now a serving-man."

    And fetching many a tender sigh,
    As thinking no one then was nigh,
    In pensive mood I laid me lowe,
    My heart was full, the tears did flowe.                          100

    The king, who had a huntinge gone,
    Grewe weary of his sport anone,
    And leaving all his gallant traine,
    Turn'd on the sudden home againe:

    And when he reach'd his statelye tower,                          105
    Hearing one sing within his bower,
    He stopt to listen, and to see
    Who sung there so melodiouslìe.

    Thus heard he everye word I sed,
    And saw the pearlye teares I shed,                               110
    And found to his amazement there,
    Sweete William was a ladye faire.

    Then stepping in, Faire ladye, rise,
    And dry, said he, those lovelye eyes,
    For I have heard thy mournful tale,                              115
    The which shall turne to thy availe.

    A crimson dye my face orespred,
    I blusht for shame, and hung my head,
    To find my sex and story knowne,
    When as I thought I was alone.                                   120

    But to be briefe, his royall grace
    Grewe so enamour'd of my face,
    The richest gifts he proffered mee,
    His mistress if that I would bee.

    Ah! no, my liege, I firmlye sayd,                                125
    I'll rather in my grave be layd,
    And though your grace hath won my heart,
    I ne'er will act soe base a part.

    Faire ladye, pardon me, sayd hee,
    Thy virtue shall rewarded bee,                                   130
    And since it is soe fairly tryde
    Thou shalt become my royal bride.

    Then strait to end his amorous strife,
    He tooke sweet William to his wife.
    The like before was never seene,                                 135
    A serving-man became a queene.

                                                                  [***]




XVIII.

GIL MORRICE.


                           A SCOTTISH BALLAD.

The following piece hath run thro' two editions in Scotland: the
second was printed at Glasgow in 1755, 8vo. Prefixed to them both is
an advertisement, setting forth that the preservation of this poem
was owing "to a lady, who favoured the printers with a copy, as it
was carefully collected from the mouths of old women and nurses;" and
"any reader that can render it more correct or complete," is desired
to oblige the public with such improvements. In consequence of this
advertisement sixteen additional verses have been produced and handed
about in manuscript, which are here inserted in their proper places:
(these are from ver. 109, to ver. 121, and from ver. 124, to ver. 129,
but are perhaps, after all, only an ingenious interpolation.)

As this poem lays claim to a pretty high antiquity, we have assigned it
a place among our early pieces: though, after all, there is reason to
believe it has received very considerable modern improvements: for in
the Editor's ancient MS. collection is a very old imperfect copy of the
same ballad: wherein though the leading features of the story are the
same, yet the colouring here is so much improved and heightened, and so
many additional strokes are thrown in, that it is evident the whole has
undergone a revisal.

This little pathetic tale suggested the plot of the tragedy of
_Douglas_.

Since it was first printed, the Editor has been assured that the
foregoing ballad is still current in many parts of Scotland, where the
hero is universally known by the name of _Child Maurice_, pronounced by
the common people _Cheild_ or _Cheeld_; which occasioned the mistake.

It may be proper to mention that other copies read ver. 110, thus:

    "Shot frae the golden sun"

And ver. 116, as follows:

    "His een like azure sheene."

N.B. The Editor's MS. instead of "lord Barnard," has "John Stewart;"
and instead of "Gil Morrice," _Child Maurice_, which last is probably
the original title. See above, p. 58.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [_Gil Maurice_ is one of the most popular of the old ballads and it
  is also one of the most corrupt. The present copy is so tinkered
  that it is not surprising Burns regarded the ballad as a modern
  composition and classed it with _Hardyknute_, a position afterwards
  taken up by Robert Chambers in his pamphlet _The Romantic Scottish
  Ballads, their epoch and authorship_. The fact however that the
  story is preserved in the Folio MS. and also in several other
  forms obtained from tradition prove it to be an authentic ballad.
  Jamieson thinks it has all the appearance of being a true narrative
  of some incident that had really taken place. Motherwell devotes
  several pages of his _Minstrelsy_ (pp. 257-286) to an account
  of the various versions. He says that tradition points out the
  "green wood" of the ballad in the ancient forest of Dundaff in
  Stirlingshire.

  The request for additions mentioned above by Percy was a tempting
  bait eagerly caught at, and the edition of 1755 was a made up
  text with additional verses. Besides vv. 109-120, 125-128, which
  are known to be interpolations, Professor Child (_English and
  Scottish Ballads_, vol. ii. p. 38) also degrades to the foot of the
  page the verses from 177 to the end, on the authority of Jamieson,
  who says, that "having been attentive to all the proceedings in
  most of the trials at the bar of ballad criticism I may venture
  to hazard an opinion that the genuine text ends with 'ver. 176.'"
  Ritson and Motherwell are of the same opinion. Sir Walter Scott
  notes on the interpolated verses, "In the beautiful and simple
  ballad of _Gil Morris_ some affected person has stuck in one or two
  factitious verses which, like vulgar persons in a drawing room,
  betray themselves by their over-finery."

  The fine copy in the Folio MS. (ed. Hales and Furnivall, vol. ii.
  p. 500), which Jamieson thought debased and totally unworthy of the
  subject, which Chambers calls "a poor, bald imperfect composition,"
  and Mr. Hales more accurately designates as "a noble specimen
  of our ballad poetry in all its strength," was first printed by
  Jamieson (_Popular Ballads and Songs_, 1806, vol. i. p. 8), and is
  now added to the present version. The last stanza of the Folio MS.
  copy is identical with the last stanza but one of _Little Musgrave_
  _and Lady Barnard_, with which it seems to have some connection
  both in subject and name.

  Prof. Aytoun points out that vv. 51-58 of Percy's copy, which are
  now placed within brackets, are taken from _Lady Maisry_, a ballad
  obtained from recitation and printed by Jamieson (vol. i. p. 73).

    "O whan he came to broken briggs
      He bent his bow and swam,
    And whan he came to the green grass growin'
      He slack'd his shoon and ran.

    And whan he came to Lord William's yeats
      He badena to chap or ca',
    But set his bent bow to his breast
      And lightly lap the wa'."

  It is however only fair to Percy to say that he printed _Gil
  Morice_ before _Lady Maisry_ was published.

  Gray wrote to a friend, "I have got the old Scotch ballad on which
  _Douglas_ was founded; it is divine, and as long as from hence
  [Cambridge] to Aston."

  Jamieson says, on the authority of Sir Walter Scott, that after the
  appearance of Home's _Douglas_ six additional stanzas, beginning--

    "She heard him speak, but fell despair
      Sat rooted in her heart
    She heard him, and she heard nae mair
      Though sair she rued the smart,"

  were written to complete the ballad, and in accordance with the
  final catastrophe of the tragedy Lord Barnard rushes into the
  thickest of the fight--

    "and meets the death he sought."

  When the play was produced in Edinburgh in 1756 the heroine was
  named Lady Barnard, and the alteration to Lady Randolph was made on
  its appearance in England in the following year.

  Jamieson gives three stanzas of a traditional version of the
  ballad, the whole of which neither he nor Motherwell could recover,
  although Mr. Sharpe told the latter that they were incorporated in
  an Annandale version which contained a novel feature in the story.

  Motherwell prints a version called _Chield Morice_, which he
  took down from the recitation of an old woman of 70 in 1827, and
  which she had learned in infancy from her grandmother. She told
  Motherwell "that at a later period of her life she also committed
  to memory _Gill Morice_, which began with young lasses like her to
  be a greater favourite, and more fashionable than the set which
  her grandmother and other old folks used to sing under the title
  of _Chield Morice_." He also prints _Child Moryce_, taken down
  from the singing of widow M'Cormick of Paisley in 1825, and adds
  his opinion that Morice and Maurice are evident corruptions of
  Norice--a foster child. The story of Langhorne's _Owen of Carron_
  is also taken from this ballad.]

       *       *       *       *       *

    Gil Morrice was an erlès son,
      His name it waxed wide;
    It was nae for his great richès,
      Nor yet his mickle pride;
    Bot it was for a lady gay,                                         5
      That livd on Carron side.

    Quhair sall I get a bonny boy,
      That will win hose and shoen;
    That will gae to lord Barnards ha',
      And bid his lady cum?                                           10
    And ye maun rin my errand, Willie;[241]
      And ye may rin wi' pride;
    Quhen other boys gae on their foot,
      On horse-back ye sall ride.

    O no! Oh no! my master dear!                                      15
      I dare nae for my life;
    I'll no gae to the bauld baròns,
      For to triest furth his wife.
    My bird Willie, my boy Willie;
      My dear Willie, he sayd:                                        20
    How can ye strive against the stream?
      For I sall be obeyd.

    Bot, O my master dear! he cryd,
      In grene wod ye're your lain;[242]
    Gi owre sic thochts, I walde ye rede,[243]                        25
      For fear ye should be tain.
    Haste, haste, I say, gae to the ha',
      Bid hir cum here wi speid:
    If ye refuse my heigh command,
      Ill gar your body bleid.                                        30

    Gae bid hir take this gay mantèl,
      'Tis a' gowd bot the hem;[244]
    Bid hir cum to the gude grene wode,
      And bring nane bot hir lain:
    And there it is, a silken sarke,                                  35
      Her ain hand sewd the sleive;
    And bid hir cum to Gill Morice,
      Speir nae bauld barons leave.

    Yes, I will gae your black errand,
      Though it be to your cost;                                      40
    Sen ye by me will nae be warn'd,
      In it ye sall find frost.
    The baron he is a man of might,
      He neir could bide to taunt,
    As ye will see before its nicht,                                  45
      How sma' ye hae to vaunt.

    And sen I maun your errand rin
      Sae sair against my will,
    I'se mak a vow and keip it trow,
      It sall be done for ill.                                        50
    [And quhen he came to broken brigue,
      He bent his bow and swam;
    And quhen he came to grass growing,
      Set down his feet and ran.

    And quhen he came to Barnards ha',                                55
      Would neither chap[245] nor ca':
    Bot set his bent bow to his breist,
      And lichtly lap the wa'.][246]
    He wauld nae tell the man his errand,
      Though he stude at the gait;                                    60
    Bot straiht into the ha' he cam,
      Quhair they were set at meit.

    Hail! hail! my gentle sire and dame!
      My message winna waite;
    Dame, ye maun to the gude grene wod                               65
      Before that it be late.
    Ye're bidden tak this gay mantèl,
      Tis a' gowd bot the hem:[244]
    You maun gae to the gude grene wode,
      Ev'n by your sel alane.                                         70

    And there it is, a silken sarke,
      Your ain hand sewd the sleive;
    Ye maun gae speik to Gill Morìce;
      Speir nae bauld barons leave.
    The lady stamped wi' hir foot,                                    75
      And winked wi' hir ee;
    Bot a' that she coud say or do,
      Forbidden he wad nae bee.

    Its surely to my bow'r-womàn;
      It neir could be to me.                                         80
    I brocht it to lord Barnards lady;
      I trow that ye be she.
    Then up and spack the wylie nurse,
      (The bairn upon hir knee)
    If it be cum frae Gill Morice,                                    85
      It's deir welcum to mee.

    Ye leid, ye leid, ye filthy nurse,
      Sae loud I heird ye lee;[247]
    I brocht it to lord Barnards lady;
      I trow ye be nae shee.                                          90
    Then up and spack the bauld baròn,
      An angry man was hee;
    He's tain the table wi' his foot,
      Sae has he wi' his knee;
    Till siller cup and 'mazer'[248] dish                             95
      In flinders he gard flee.[249]

    Gae bring a robe of your clidìng,[250]
      That hings upon the pin;
    And I'll gae to the gude grene wode,
      And speik wi' your lemmàn.                                     100
    O bide at hame, now lord Barnàrd,
      I warde ye bide at hame;
    Neir wyte[251] a man for violence,
      That neir wate[252] ye wi' nane.

    Gil Morice sate in gude grene wode,                              105
      He whistled and he sang':
    O what mean a' the folk comìng,
      My mother tarries lang.
    [His hair was like the threeds of gold,
      Drawne frae Minervas loome:                                    110
    His lipps like roses drapping dew,
      His breath was a' perfume.

    His brow was like the mountain snae
      Gilt by the morning beam:
    His cheeks like living roses glow:                               115
      His een like azure stream.
    The boy was clad in robes of grene,
      Sweete as the infant spring:
    And like the mavis on the bush,
      He gart the vallies ring.]                                     120

    The baron came to the grene wode,
      Wi' mickle dule and care,
    And there he first spied Gill Morìce
      Kameing his yellow hair:
    [That sweetly wavd around his face,                              125
      That face beyond compare:
    He sang sae sweet it might dispel,
      A' rage but fell despair.][253]

    Nae wonder, nae wonder, Gill Morìce,
      My lady loed thee weel,                                        130
    The fairest part of my bodie
      Is blacker than thy heel.
    Yet neir the less now, Gill Morìce,
      For a' thy great beautiè,
    Ye's rew the day ye eir was born;                                135
      That head sall gae wi' me.

    Now he has drawn his trusty brand,
      And slaited on the strae;[254]
    And thro' Gill Morice' fair body
      He's gar cauld iron gae.                                       140
    And he has tain Gill Morice' head
      And set it on a speir;
    The meanest man in a' his train
      Has gotten that head to bear.

    And he has tain Gill Morice up,                                  145
      Laid him across his steid,
    And brocht him to his painted bowr
      And laid him on a bed.
    The lady sat on castil wa',
      Beheld baith dale and doun;                                    150
    And there she saw Gill Morice' head
      Cum trailing to the toun.

    Far better I loe that bluidy head,
      Both and that yellow hair,
    Than lord Barnard, and a' his lands,                             155
      As they lig here and thair.
    And she has tain her Gill Morice,
      And kissd baith mouth and chin:
    I was once as fow of Gill Morice,
      As the hip is o' the stean.[255]                               160

    I got ye in my father's house,
      Wi' mickle sin and shame;
    I brocht thee up in gude grene wode,
      Under the heavy rain.
    Oft have I by thy cradle sitten,                                 165
      And fondly seen thee sleip;
    But now I gae about thy grave,
      The saut tears for to weip.

    And syne she kissd his bluidy cheik,
      And syne his bluidy chin:                                      170
    O better I loe my Gill Morice
      Than a' my kith and kin!
    Away, away, ye ill womàn,
      And an il deith mait ye dee:
    Gin I had kend he'd bin your son,                                175
      He'd neir bin slain for mee.

    [Obraid me not, my lord Barnard!
      Obraid me not for shame!
    Wi' that saim speir O pierce my heart!
      And put me out o' pain.                                        180
    Since nothing bot Gill Morice head
      Thy jelous rage could quell,
    Let that saim hand now tak hir life,
      That neir to thee did ill.

    To me nae after days nor nichts                                  185
      Will eir be saft or kind;
    I'll fill the air with heavy sighs,
      And greet till I am blind.
    Enouch of blood by me's bin spilt,
      Seek not your death frae mee;                                  190
    I rather lourd it had been my sel
      Than eather him or thee.

    With waefo wae I hear your plaint;
      Sair, sair I rew the deid,
    That eir this cursed hand of mine                                195
      Had gard his body bleid.
    Dry up your tears, my winsome dame,
      Ye neir can heal the wound;
    Ye see his head upon the speir,
      His heart's blude on the ground.                               200

    I curse the hand that did the deid,
      The heart that thocht the ill;
    The feet that bore me wi' silk speid,
      The comely youth to kill.
    I'll ay lament for Gill Morice,                                  205
      As gin he were mine ain;
    I'll neir forget the dreiry day
      On which the youth was slain.]

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

  [The following is copied from the Folio MS. (ed. H. & F. vol. 2.
  pp. 502-506.)

    Childe Maurice hunted ithe siluen wood,
      he hunted itt round about,
    & noebodye that he ffound therin,
      nor none there was with-out.                                     4

    & he tooke his siluer combe in his hand,
      to kembe his yellow lockes;
    he sayes, "come hither, thou litle ffoot page,
      that runneth lowlye by my knee;                                  8
    ffor thou shalt goe to Iohn stewards wiffe
      & pray her speake with mee.

    "& as itt ffalls out many times,
      as knotts beene knitt on a kell,                                12
    or Marchant men gone to Leeue London
      either to buy ware or sell,

    "I, and greete thou doe that Ladye well,
      euer soe well ffroe mee,--                                      16
    And as itt ffalles out many times
      as any hart can thinke,

    "as schoole masters are in any schoole house
      writting with pen and Iinke,--                                  20
    ffor if I might, as well as shee may,
      this night I wold with her speake.

    "& heere I send her a mantle of greene,
      as greene as any grasse,                                        24
    & bidd her come to the siluer wood
      to hunt with Child Maurice;

    "& there I send her a ring of gold,
      a ring of precyous stone,                                       28
    & bidd her come to the siluer wood;
      let ffor no kind of man."

    one while this litle boy he yode,
      another while he ran;                                           32
    vntill he came to Iohn Stewards hall,
      I-wis he neuer blan.

    & of nurture the child had good;
      hee ran vp hall & bower ffree,                                  36
    & when he came to this Lady ffaire,
      sayes, "god you saue and see!

    "I am come ffrom Ch[i]ld Maurice,
      a message vnto thee;                                            40
    & Child Maurice, he greetes you well,
      & euer soe well ffrom mee.

    "& as itt ffalls out oftentimes,
      as knotts beene knitt on a kell,                                44
    or Marchant men gone to leeue London,
      either ffor to buy ware or sell,

    "& as oftentimes he greetes you well
      as any hart can thinke,                                         48
    or schoole masters in any schoole
      wryting with pen and inke;

    "& heere he sends a Mantle of greene,
      as greene as any grasse,                                        52
    & he bidds you come to the siluer wood,
      to hunt with Child Maurice.

    "& heere he sends you a ring of gold,
      a ring of the precyous stone,                                   56
    he prayes you to come to the siluer wood,
      let ffor no kind of man."

    "now peace, now peace, thou litle ffootpage,
      ffor Christes sake, I pray thee!                                60
    ffor if my lord heare one of these words,
      thou must be hanged hye!"

    Iohn steward stood vnder the Castle wall,
      & he wrote the words euerye one,                                64
    & he called vnto his horskeeper,
      "make readye you my steede!"
    I, and soe hee did to his Chamberlaine,
      "make readye then my weede!"                                    68

    & he cast a lease[256] vpon his backe,
      & he rode to the siluer wood;
    & there he sought all about,
      about the siluer wood,                                          72

    & there he ffound him Child Maurice
      sitting vpon a blocke,
    with a siluer combe in his hand
      kembing his yellow locke.                                       76

    he sayes, "how now, how now, Child Maurice?
      alacke! how may this bee?"
    but then stood vp him Child Maurice,
      & sayd these words trulye:                                      80

    "I doe not know your Ladye," he said,
      "if that I doe her see."
    "ffor thou hast sent her loue tokens,
      more now then 2 or 3;                                           84

    "ffor thou hast sent her a mantle of greene,
      as greene as any grasse,
    & bade her come to the siluer woode
      to hunt with Child Maurice;                                     88

    "& thou [hast] sent her a ring of gold,
      a ring of precyous stone,
    & bade her come to the siluer wood,
      let ffor noe kind of man.                                       92

    "and by my ffaith, now, Child Maurice,
      the tone of vs shall dye!"
    "Now be my troth," sayd Child Maurice,
      "& that shall not be I."                                        96

    but hee pulled forth a bright browne sword
      & dryed itt on the grasse,
    & soe ffast he smote att Iohn Steward,
      I-wisse he neuer rest.                                         100

    then hee pulled fforth his bright browne sword,
      & dryed itt on his sleeue;
    & the ffirst good stroke Iohn Stewart stroke,
      Child Maurice head he did cleeue;                              104

    & he pricked itt on his swords poynt,
      went singing there beside,
    & he rode till he came to that Ladye ffaire
      wheras this ladye Lyed;                                        108

    and sayes "dost thou know Child Maurice head
      if that thou dost itt see?
    & lapp itt soft, & kisse itt offt,
      ffor thou louedst him better then mee."                        112

    but when shee looked on Child Maurice head
      shee neuer spake words but 3,
    "I neuer beare no Child but one,
      & you haue slaine him trulye."                                 116

    sayes, "wicked by my merry men all,
      I gaue Meate, drinke, & Clothe!
    but cold they not haue holden me
      when I was in all that wrath?                                  120

    "ffor I haue slaine one of the curteouse[s]t Knights
      that euer bestrode a steed!
    soe haue I done one [of] the fairest Ladyes
      that euer ware womans weede!"                                  124

                                                                 ffins]

FOOTNOTES:

[241] Ver. 11. something seems wanting here.

[242] [alone by yourself.]

[243] [advise.]

[244] Ver. 32, and 68, perhaps, _'bout the hem_.

[245] [knock.]

[246] V. 58. Could this be the wall of the castle?

[247] Ver. 88. Perhaps, _loud say I heire_.

[248] _i.e._ a drinking cup of maple: other edit. read _ezar_.

[249] [in splinters he made fly.]

[250] [clothing.]

[251] [blame.]

[252] [blamed.]

[253] Ver. 128. So Milton,--

    "Vernal delight and joy: able to drive
    All sadness but despair."--

                                                         B. iv. v. 155.

[254] [and wiped it on the grass.]

[255] [as the berry is of the stone.]

[256] leash, thong, cord?--F.

                       THE END OF THE FIRST BOOK.

[Illustration]

                   RELIQUES OF ANCIENT POETRY, ETC.

                           SERIES THE THIRD.




BOOK II.


[Illustration]

[Illustration]




I.

THE LEGEND OF SIR GUY


Contains a short summary of the exploits of this famous champion, as
recorded in the old story books; and is commonly intitled, "A pleasant
song of the valiant deeds of chivalry atchieved by that noble knight
sir Guy of Warwick, who, for the love of fair Phelis, became a hermit,
and dyed in a cave of craggy rocke, a mile distant from Warwick."

The history of Sir Guy, tho' now very properly resigned to children,
was once admired by all readers of wit and taste: for taste and wit
had once their childhood. Although of English growth, it was early a
favourite with other nations: it appeared in French in 1525; and is
alluded to in the old Spanish romance _Tirante el Blanco_, which, it is
believed, was written not long after the year 1430. See advertisement
to the French translation, 2 vols. 12mo.

The original whence all these stories are extracted is a very ancient
romance in old English verse, which is quoted by Chaucer as a
celebrated piece even in his time (viz.:--

      "Men speken of romances of price,
    Of Horne childe and Ippotis,
      Of Bevis, and sir Guy," &c.--_R. of Thop._)

and was usually sung to the harp at Christmas dinners and brideales, as
we learn from Puttenham's _Art of Poetry_, 4to. 1589.

This ancient romance is not wholly lost. An imperfect copy in black
letter, "Imprynted at London----for Wylliam Copland," in 34 sheets
4to. without date, is still preserved among Mr. Garrick's collection
of old plays. As a specimen of the poetry of this antique rhymer, take
his description of the dragon mentioned in v. 105 of the following
ballad:--

      "----A messenger came to the king.
    Syr king, he sayd, lysten me now,
    For bad tydinges I bring you,
    In Northumberlande there is no man,
    But that they be slayne everychone:
    For there dare no man route,
    By twenty myle rounde aboute,
    For doubt of a fowle dragon,
    That sleath men and beastes downe.
    He is blacke as any cole,
    Rugged as a rough fole;
    His bodye from the navill upwarde
    No man may it pierce it is so harde;
    His neck is great as any summere;
    He renneth as swifte as any distrere;
    Pawes he hath as a lyon:
    All that he toucheth he sleath dead downe.
    Great winges he hath to flight,
    That is no man that bare him might.
    There may no man fight him agayne,
    But that he sleath him certayne:
    For a fowler beast then is he,
    Ywis of none never heard ye."

Sir William Dugdale is of opinion that the story of Guy is not wholly
apocryphal, tho' he acknowledges the monks have sounded out his praises
too hyperbolically. In particular, he gives the duel fought with the
Danish champion as a real historical truth, and fixes the date of it in
the year 926, Ætat. Guy, 67. See his _Warwickshire_.

The following is written upon the same plan as ballad v. book i., but
which is the original and which the copy cannot be decided. This song
is ancient, as may be inferred from the idiom preserved in the margin,
v. 94, 102: and was once popular, as appears from Fletcher's _Knight of
the Burning Pestle_, act 2, sc. ult.

It is here published from an ancient MS. copy in the editor's old folio
volume, collated with two printed ones, one of which is in black letter
in the Pepys collection.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [Guy was one of the most popular of the heroes of romance, and the
  Folio MS. contains three pieces upon his history, viz., the two
  printed here and _Guy and Colbrand_.

  The original of the present ballad in the Folio MS., entitled _Guy
  and Phillis_ (ed. Hales and Furnivall, vol. ii. p. 201), is a mere
  fragment beginning with verse 89. Percy tore out certain leaves
  to send to the printer, and in consequence the whole of _King
  Estmere_ and the beginning of this ballad are lost. Alterations
  have been made in nearly every verse by the help of the printed
  copies. _Guy and Phillis_ was entered on the Stationers' books, 5th
  January, 1591-2.

  We are told by Dugdale that an English traveller, about the
  year 1410, was hospitably received at Jerusalem by the Soldan's
  lieutenant, who, hearing that Lord Beauchamp "was descended from
  the famous Guy of Warwick, whose story they had in books of their
  own language, invited him to his palace; and royally feasting him,
  presented him with three precious stones of great value, besides
  divers cloaths of silk and gold given to his servants." Dugdale's
  authority for this story was John Rous, a priest of the chapel at
  Guy's Cliff, near Warwick, who compiled a biography of the hero, in
  which all the incidents of the romance are narrated as sober fact.
  The constant praises of the hero bored some people, and Corbet, in
  his _Iter Boreale_, expressed the hope that he should hear no more
  of him--

    "May all the ballads be call'd in and dye
    Which sing the warrs of Colebrand and Sir Guy."

  Much valuable information on this subject will be found in Mr.
  Hale's interesting introduction to the Guy poems in the Folio MS.]

       *       *       *       *       *

    Was ever knight for ladyes sake
      Soe tost in love, as I sir Guy
    For Phelis fayre, that lady bright
      As ever man beheld with eye?

    She gave me leave myself to try,
      The valiant knight with sheeld and speare,
    Ere that her love shee wold grant me;
      Which made mee venture far and neare.

    Then proved I a baron bold,[257]
      In deeds of armes the doughtyest knight
    That in those dayes in England was,
      With sworde and speare in feild to fight.

    An English man I was by birthe:
      In faith of Christ a christyan true:
    The wicked lawes of infidells                                     15
      I sought by prowesse to subdue.

    'Nine' hundred twenty yeere and odde[258]
      After our Saviour Christ his birth,
    When king Athèlstone wore the crowne,
      I lived heere upon the earth.                                   20

    Sometime I was of Warwicke erle,
      And, as I sayd, of very truth
    A ladyes love did me constraine
      To seeke strange ventures in my youth.

    To win me fame by feates of armes                                 25
      In strange and sundry heathen lands;
    Where I atchieved for her sake
      Right dangerous conquests with my hands.

    For first I sayled to Normandye,
      And there I stoutlye wan in fight                               30
    The emperours daughter of Almaine,
      From manye a vallyant worthye knight.

    Then passed I the seas to Greece
      To helpe the emperour in his right;
    Against the mightye souldans hoaste                               35
      Of puissant Persians for to fight.

    Where I did slay of Sarazens,
      And heathen pagans, manye a man;
    And slew the souldans cozen deere,
      Who had to name doughtye Coldràn.                               40

    Eskeldered a famous knight
      To death likewise I did pursue:
    And Elmayne king of Tyre alsoe,
      Most terrible in fight to viewe.

    I went into the souldans hoast,                                   45
      Being thither on embassage sent,
    And brought his head awaye with mee;
      I having slaine him in his tent.

    There was a dragon in that land
      Most fiercelye mett me by the waye                              50
    As hee a lyon did pursue,
      Which I myself did alsoe slay.

    Then soon I past the seas from Greece,
      And came to Pavye land aright:
    Where I the duke of Pavye killed,                                 55
      His hainous treason to requite.

    To England then I came with speede,
      To wedd faire Phelis lady bright:
    For love of whome I travelled farr
      To try my manhood and my might.                                 60

    But when I had espoused her,
      I stayd with her but fortye dayes,
    Ere that I left this ladye faire,
      And went from her beyond the seas.

    All cladd in gray, in pilgrim sort,                               65
      My voyage from her I did take
    Unto the blessed Holy-land,
      For Jesus Christ my Saviours sake.

    Where I erle Jonas did redeeme,
      And all his sonnes which were fifteene,                         70
    Who with the cruell Sarazens
      In prison for long time had beene.

    I slew the gyant Amarant
      In battel fiercelye hand to hand:
    And doughty Barknard killed I,                                    75
      A treacherous knight of Pavye land.

    Then I to England came againe,
      And here with Colbronde fell I fought:
    An ugly gyant, which the Danes
      Had for their champion hither brought.                          80

    I overcame him in the feild,
      And slewe him soone right valliantlye;
    Wherebye this land I did redeeme
      From Danish tribute utterlye.

    And afterwards I offered upp                                      85
      The use of weapons solemnlye
    At Winchester, whereas I fought,
      In sight of manye farr and nye.

    'But first,' neare Winsor, I did slaye
      A bore of passing might and strength;                           90
    Whose like in England never was
      For hugenesse both in bredth, and length.

    Some of his bones in Warwicke yett,
      Within the castle there doe lye:[259]
    One of his sheeld-bones to this day                               95
      Hangs in the citye of Coventrye.

    On Dunsmore heath I alsoe slewe
      A monstrous wyld and cruell beast,
    Calld the Dun-cow of Dunsmore heath;
      Which manye people had opprest.                                100

    Some of her bones in Warwicke yett
      Still for a monument doe lye;[259]
    And there exposed to lookers viewe
      As wonderous strange, they may espye.

    A dragon in Northumberland,                                      105
      I alsoe did in fight destroye,
    Which did bothe man and beast oppresse,
      And all the countrye sore annoye.

    At length to Warwicke I did come,
      Like pilgrim poore and was not knowne;                         110
    And there I lived a hermitts life
      A mile and more out of the towne.

    Where with my hands I hewed a house
      Out of a craggy rocke of stone;
    And lived like a palmer poore                                    115
      Within that cave myself alone:

    And daylye came to begg my bread
      Of Phelis att my castle gate;
    Not knowne unto my loved wiffe
      Who dailye mourned for her mate.                               120

    Till att the last I fell sore sicke,
      Yea sicke soe sore that I must dye;
    I sent to her a ring of golde,
      By which shee knew me presentlye.

    Then shee repairing to the cave                                  125
      Before that I gave up the ghost;
    Herself closd up my dying eyes:
      My Phelis faire, whom I lovd most.

    Thus dreadful death did me arrest,
      To bring my corpes unto the grave;                             130
    And like a palmer dyed I,
      Wherby I sought my soule to save.

    My body that endured this toyle,
      Though now it be consumed to mold;
    My statue faire engraven in stone,                               135
      In Warwicke still you may behold.

FOOTNOTES:

[257] Ver. 9. The proud Sir Guy, _PC._

[258] Ver. 17. Two hundred, MS. and P.

[259] Ver. 94, 102, doth lye, MS.




II.

GUY AND AMARANT.


The Editor found this Poem in his ancient folio manuscript among the
old ballads; he was desirous therefore that it should still accompany
them; and as it is not altogether devoid of merit, its insertion here
will be pardoned.

Although this piece seems not imperfect, there is reason to believe
that it is only part of a much larger poem, which contained the whole
history of sir Guy: for upon comparing it with the common story book
12mo. we find the latter to be nothing more than this poem reduced to
prose: which is only effected by now and then altering the rhyme, and
throwing out some few of the poetical ornaments. The disguise is so
slight, that it is an easy matter to pick complete stanzas in any page
of that book.

The author of this poem has shown some invention. Though he took the
subject from the old romance quoted before, he has adorned it afresh,
and made the story intirely his own.

This poem has been discovered to be a fragment of, "The famous historie
of Guy earl of Warwicke, by _Samuel Rowlands_, London, printed by J.
Bell, 1649, 4to." in xii cantos, beginning thus:

    "When dreadful Mars in armour every day."

Whether the edition in 1649, was the first, is not known, but the
author _Sam. Rowlands_ was one of the minor poets who lived in the
reigns of Q. Elizabeth and James I. and perhaps later. His other poems
are chiefly of the religious kind, which makes it probable that the
hist. of Guy was one of his earliest performances.--There are extant
of his (1.) "_The betraying of Christ, Judas in dispaire, the seven
words of our Saviour on the crosse, with other poems on the passion,
&c._ 1598, 4to. (Ames Typ. p. 428.)--(2.) _A Theatre of delightful
Recreation._ Lond. printed for A. Johnson, 1605," 4to. (Penes editor.)
This is a book of poems on subjects chiefly taken from the old
Testament. (3.) "_Memory of Christ's miracles, in verse._ Lond. 1618,
4to." (4.) "_Heaven's glory, earth's vanity, and hell's horror._
Lond. 1638, 8vo." (These two in Bod. Cat.)

In the present edition the following poem has been much improved from
the printed copy.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [This poem is a very poor thing and looks very like a joke in some
  parts. In the Folio MS. Percy has written "By the elegance of
  language and easy flow of the versification this poem should be
  more modern than the rest."

  Mr. Furnivall adds to this expression of opinion the following
  note, "the first bombastic rhodomontade affair in the book.
  Certainly modern and certainly bad" (Folio MS. ed. Hales and
  Furnivall, vol. ii. p. 136.) Collations from the MS. are added at
  the foot of the page.]

       *       *       *       *       *

    Guy journeyes towards that sanctifyed ground,[260]
      Whereas the Jewes fayre citye sometime stood,
    Wherin our Saviour's sacred head was crowned,
      And where for sinfull man he shed his blood:
    To see the sepulcher was his intent,                               5
    The tombe that Joseph unto Jesus lent.

    With tedious miles he tyred his wearye feet,
      And passed desart places full of danger,
    At last with a most woefull wight[261] did meet,
      A man that unto sorrow was noe stranger:                        10
    For he had fifteen sonnes, made captives all
    To slavish bondage, in extremest thrall.

    A gyant called Amarant detaind them,
      Whom noe man durst encounter for his strength:
    Who in a castle, which he held, had chaind them:                  15
      Guy questions, where? and understands at length
    The place not farr.--Lend me thy sword, quoth hee,
    Ile lend my manhood all thy sonnes to free.

    With that he goes, and lays upon the dore,
      Like one that sayes, I must, and will come in:[262]             20
    The gyant never was soe rowz'd before;[263]
      For noe such knocking at his gate had bin:
    Soe takes his keyes, and clubb, and cometh out
    Staring with ireful countenance about.

    Sirra, quoth hee, what busines hast thou heere?[264]              25
      Art come to feast the crowes about my walls?[265]
    Didst never heare, noe ransome can him cleere,[266]
      That in the compasse of my furye falls:
    For making me to take a porters paines,
    With this same clubb I will dash out thy braines.                 30

    Gyant, quoth Guy, y'are quarrelsome I see,[267]
      Choller and you seem very neere of kin:[268]
    Most dangerous at the clubb belike you bee;[269]
      I have bin better armed, though nowe goe thin;
    But shew thy utmost hate, enlarge thy spight,                     35
    Keene is my weapon, and shall doe me right.[270]

    Soe draws his sword, salutes him with the same[271]
      About the head, the shoulders, and the side:[272]
    Whilst his erected clubb doth death proclaime,
      Standinge with huge Colossus' spacious stride,                  40
    Putting such vigour to his knotty beame,
    That like a furnace he did smoke extreame.

    But on the ground he spent his strokes in vaine,
      For Guy was nimble to avoyde them still,
    And ever ere he heav'd his clubb againe,[273]                     45
      Did brush his plated coat against his will:[274]
    Att such advantage Guy wold never fayle,
    To bang him soundlye in his coate of mayle.[275]

    Att last through thirst the gyant feeble grewe,[276]
      And sayd to Guy, As thou'rt of humane race,                     50
    Shew itt in this, give natures wants their dewe,[277]
      Let me but goe, and drinke in yonder place:
    Thou canst not yeeld to "me" a smaller thing,
    Than to graunt life, thats given by the spring.[278]

    I graunt thee leave, quoth Guye, goe drink thy last,[279]         55
      Go pledge the dragon, and the salvage bore[280]:[281]
    Succeed the tragedyes that they have past,
      But never thinke to taste cold water more:[282]
    Drinke deepe to Death and unto him carouse:[283]
    Bid him receive thee in his earthen house.                        60

    Soe to the spring he goes, and slakes his thirst;
      Takeing the water in extremely like
    Some wracked shipp that on a rocke is burst,[284]
      Whose forced hulke against the stones does stryke;[285]
    Scooping it in soe fast with both his hands,                      65
    That Guy admiring to behold it stands.[286]

    Come on, quoth Guy, let us to worke againe,[287]
      Thou stayest about thy liquor overlong;
    The fish, which in the river doe remaine,
      Will want thereby; thy drinking doth them wrong:
    But I will see their satisfaction made,                           71
    With gyants blood they must, and shall be payd.

    Villaine, quoth Amarant, Ile crush thee streight;
      Thy life shall pay thy daring toungs offence:
    This clubb, which is about some hundred weight,                   75
      Is deathes commission to dispatch thee hence:[288]
    Dresse thee for ravens dyett I must needes;
    And breake thy bones, as they were made of reedes.

    Incensed much by these bold pagan bostes,[289]
      Which worthye Guy cold ill endure to heare,                     80
    He hewes upon those bigg supporting postes,
      Which like two pillars did his body beare:
    Amarant for those wounds in choller growes
    And desperatelye att Guy his clubb he throwes:

    Which did directly on his body light,                             85
      Soe violent, and weighty there-withall,[290]
    That downe to ground on sudden came the knight;
      And, ere he cold recover from the fall,[291]
    The gyant gott his clubb againe in fist,[292]
    And aimd a stroke that wonderfullye mist.[293]                    90

    Traytor, quoth Guy, thy falshood Ile repay,
      This coward act to intercept my bloode.
    Sayes Amarant, Ile murther any way,
      With enemyes all vantages are good:
    O could I poyson in thy nostrills blowe,                          95
    Besure of it I wold dispatch thee soe.[294]

    Its well, said Guy, thy honest thoughts appeare,
      Within that beastlye bulke where devills dwell;
    Which are thy tenants while thou livest heare,
      But will be landlords when thou comest in hell:                100
    Vile miscreant, prepare thee for their den,
    Inhumane monster, hatefull unto men.[295]

    But breathe thy selfe a time, while I goe drinke,
      For flameing Ph[oe]bus with his fyerye eye
    Torments me soe with burning heat, I thinke                      105
      My thirst wold serve to drinke an ocean drye:
    Forbear a litle, as I delt with thee.
    Quoth Amarant, 'Thou hast noe foole of mee.

    Noe, sillye wretch, my father taught more witt,
      How I shold use such enemyes as thou;                          110
    By all my gods I doe rejoice at itt,
      To understand that thirst constraines thee now;
    For all the treasure, that the world containes,
    One drop of water shall not coole thy vaines.

    Releeve my foe! why, 'twere a madmans part:                      115
      Refresh an adversarye to my wrong!
    If thou imagine this, a child thou art:
      Noe, fellow, I have known the world too long
    To be soe simple: now I know thy want,
    A minutes space of breathing I'll not grant.[296]                120

    And with these words heaving aloft his clubb
      Into the ayre, he swings the same about:
    Then shakes his lockes, and doth his temples rubb,
      And, like the Cyclops, in his pride doth strout:[297]
    Sirra, sayes hee, I have you at a lift,                          125
    Now you are come unto your latest shift.

    Perish forever: with this stroke I send thee
      A medicine, that will doe thy thirst much good;[298]
    Take noe more care for drinke before I end thee,
      And then wee'll have carouses of thy blood:                    130
    Here's at thee with a butchers downright blow,
    To please my furye with thine overthrow.

    Infernall, false, obdurate feend, said Guy,[299]
      That seemst a lumpe of crueltye from hell;[300]
    Ungratefull monster, since thou dost deny[301]                   135
      The thing to mee wherin I used thee well:
    With more revenge, than ere my sword did make,
    On thy accursed head revenge Ile take.

    Thy gyants longitude shall shorter shrinke,
      Except thy sun-scorcht skin be weapon proof:[302]              140
    Farewell my thirst; I doe disdaine to drinke,
      Streames keepe your waters to your owne behoof;[303]
    Or let wild beasts be welcome thereunto;
    With those pearle drops I will not have to do.

    Here, tyrant, take a taste of my good-will,[304]                 145
      For thus I doe begin my bloodye bout:
    You cannot chuse but like the greeting ill;
      It is not that same clubb will beare you out;
    And take this payment on thy shaggye crowne.--
    A blowe that brought him with a vengeance downe.                 150

    Then Guy sett foot upon the monsters brest,
      And from his shoulders did his head divide;
    Which with a yawninge mouth did gape, unblest;
      Noe dragons jawes were ever scene soe wide
    To open and to shut, till life was spent.                        155
    Then Guy tooke keyes and to the castle went.

    Where manye woefull captives he did find,
      Which had beene tyred with extremityes;
    Whom he in freindly manner did unbind,
      And reasoned with them of their miseryes:[305]                 160
    Eche told a tale with teares, and sighes, and cryes,
    All weeping to him with complaining eyes.

    There tender ladyes in darke dungeons lay,[306]
      That were surprised in the desart wood,
    And had noe other dyett everye day,                              165
      But flesh of humane creatures for their food:[307]
    Some with their lovers bodyes had beene fed,
    And in their wombes their husbands buryed.

    Now he bethinkes him of his being there,                         169
      To enlarge the wronged brethren from their woes;
    And, as he searcheth, doth great clamours heare,
      By which sad sound's direction on he goes,
    Untill he findes a darksome obscure gate,
    Arm'd strongly ouer all with iron plate.

    That he unlockes, and enters, where appeares,                    175
      The strangest object that he ever saw;
    Men that with famishment of many yeares,
      Were like deathes picture, which the painters draw;[308]
    Divers of them were hanged by eche thombe;
    Others head-downward: by the middle some.                        180

    With diligence he takes them from the walle,[309]
      With lybertye their thraldome to acquaint:
    Then the perplexed knight their father calls,[310]
      And sayes, Receive thy sonnes though poore and faint:
    I promisd you their lives, accept of that;                       185
    But did not warrant you they shold be fat.[311]

    The castle I doe give thee, heere's the keyes,
      Where tyranye for many yeeres did dwell:
    Procure the gentle tender ladyes ease,
      For pittyes sake, use wronged women well:[312]                 190
    Men easilye revenge the wrongs men do:[313]
    But poore weake women have not strength thereto.[314]

    The good old man, even overjoyed with this,
      Fell on the ground, and wold have kist Guys feete:
    Father, quoth he, refraine soe base a kiss,                      195
      For age to honor youth I hold unmeete:
    Ambitious pryde hath hurt mee all it can,
    I goe to mortifie a sinfull man.

FOOTNOTES:

[260] [Ver. 1. journeyed ore the.]

[261] Erle Jonas, mentioned in the foregoing ballad.

[262] [V. 20. he sayes that must. MS.]

[263] [Ver. 21. the gyant, he was neere soe.]

[264] [V. 25. sais hee.]

[265] [V. 26. my crowes about the walls.]

[266] [V. 27. cold him.]

[267] [V. 31. saies Guy your quarrelsome.]

[268] [V. 32. are something neere.]

[269] [V. 33. _most_ not in MS., a club.]

[270] [V. 36. heere is the wepon that must doe.]

[271] [V. 37. Soe takes.]

[272] [V. 38. sides.]

[273] [V. 45. and ere he cold recovers clubb againe.]

[274] [V. 46. did beate.]

[275] [V. 48. to beate.]

[276] [Ver. 49. att last through strength, Amarant feeble grew.]

[277] [V. 51. nature wants her.]

[278] [V. 54. then to grant.]

[279] [V. 55. I give.]

[280] Which Guy had slain before

[281] [V. 56. to pledge, beare.]

[282] [V. 58. to drinke cold.]

[283] [V. 59. and after that carrouse.]

[284] [V. 63. on some rocke.]

[285] [V. 64. bulke doe stryke.]

[286] [V. 66. behold him.]

[287] [V. 67. lets to one.]

[288] [V. 76. has deathes.]

[289] [Ver. 79. att this bold pagans bostes.]

[290] [V. 86. soe heavy and soe weaghtye.]

[291] [V. 88. his fall.]

[292] [V. 89. in his fist.]

[293] [V. 90. and stroke a blow.]

[294] [V. 96. I wold destroy.]

[295] [V. 102. hurtfull.]

[296] [Ver. 120. space to thee I will not.]

[297] [strut.]

[298] [V. 128. _that_ not in MS.]

[299] [V. 133. Guy said.]

[300] [V. 134. seemes.]

[301] [V. 135. ingratefull monster since thou hast denyd.]

[302] [Ver. 140. doe weapon prove.]

[303] [V. 142. behoves.]

[304] [V. 145. Hold, tyrant.]

[305] [V. 160. miserye.]

[306] [V. 163. dungeon.]

[307] [V. 166. then flesh.]

[308] [Ver. 178. Will were.]

[309] [V. 181. walls.]

[310] [V. 183. the father.]

[311] [V. 186. promise you.]

[312] [V. 190. pittye sake.]

[313] [V. 191. men may easilye revenge the deeds men doe.]

[314] [V. 192. no strength. MS.]




III.

THE AULD GOOD-MAN.


                            A SCOTTISH SONG.

I have not been able to meet with a more ancient copy of this humourous
old song, than that printed in the _Tea-Table miscellany, &c._ which
seems to have admitted some corruptions.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [This song is printed in Ramsay's _Tea-Table Miscellany_ as old,
  and it is also given in the _Orpheus Caledonius_, 1725. "Auld
  goodman" means a first husband.]

       *       *       *       *       *

    Late in an evening forth I went
      A little before the sun gade down,
    And there I chanc't, by accident,
      To light on a battle new begun:
    A man and his wife wer fawn[315] in a strife,                      5
      I canna weel tell ye how it began;
    But aye she wail'd her wretched life,
      Cryeng, Evir alake, mine auld goodman!

                                  HE.

    Thy auld goodman, that thou tells of,
      The country kens where he was born,                             10
    Was but a silly poor vagabond,
      And ilka ane leugh him to scorn:
    For he did spend and make an end
      Of gear 'his fathers nevir' wan;
    He gart the poor stand frae the door;                             15
      Sae tell nae mair of thy auld goodman.


    My heart, alake! is liken to break,
      Whan I think on my winsome John,
    His blinkan ee, and gait sae free,
      Was naithing like thee, thou dosend[316] drone;                 20
    Wi' his rosie face, and flaxen hair,
      And skin as white as ony swan,
    He was large and tall, and comely withall;
      Thou'lt nevir be like mine auld goodman.

                                  HE.

    Why dost thou plein?[317] I thee maintein;                        25
      For meal and mawt thou disna want:
    But thy wild bees I canna please,
      Now whan our gear gins to grow scant:
    Of houshold stuff thou hast enough;
      Thou wants for neither pot nor pan;                             30
    Of sicklike ware he left thee bare;
      Sae tell nae mair of thy auld goodman.

                                  SHE.

    Yes I may tell, and fret my sell,
      To think on those blyth days I had,
    Whan I and he, together ley                                       35
      In armes into a well-made bed:
    But now I sigh and may be sad,
      Thy courage is cauld, thy colour wan,
    Thou falds thy feet and fa's asleep;
      Thou'lt nevir be like mine auld goodman.                        40

    Then coming was the night sae dark,
      And gane was a' the light of day?
    The carle was fear'd to miss his mark,
      And therefore wad nae longer stay:
    Then up he gat, and ran his way,                                  45
      I trowe, the wife the day she wan;
    And aye the owreword[318] of the fray
      Was, Evir alake! mine auld goodman.

FOOTNOTES:

[315] [fallen.]

[316] [dozing or stupid.]

[317] [complain.]

[318] [last word or burden.]




IV.

FAIR MARGARET AND SWEET WILLIAM.


This seems to be the old song quoted in Fletcher's _Knight of the
burning pestle_, acts 2d and 3d; altho' the six lines there preserved
are somewhat different from those in the ballad, as it stands at
present. The reader will not wonder at this, when he is informed that
this is only given from a modern printed copy picked up on a stall.
It's full title is _Fair Margaret's Misfortunes; or Sweet William's
frightful dreams on his wedding night, with the sudden death and
burial of those noble lovers_.--

The lines preserved in the play are this distich,

    "You are no love for me, Margaret,
    I am no love for you."

And the following stanza,

    "When it was grown to dark midnight,
      And all were fast asleep,
    In came Margarets grimly ghost
      And stood at Williams feet."

These lines have acquired an importance by giving birth to one of
the most beautiful ballads in our own or any language. See the song
intitled _Margaret's Ghost_, at the end of this volume.

Since the first edition some improvements have been inserted, which
were communicated by a lady of the first distinction, as she had heard
this song repeated in her infancy.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [The ballads on the two lovers Margaret and William are numerous,
  culminating as they do in Mallet's _William and Margaret_. See
  _Sweet William's Ghost_ (No. 6 in this book) and Mallet's ballad
  (No. 16 of book iii). The present ballad is also in the Douce
  Collection and in that of the late Mr. George Daniel. Jamieson
  prints (_Popular Ballads and Songs_, 1806, vol. i. p. 22) a ballad
  entitled _Sweet Willie and Fair Annie_, which may be divided into
  two parts, the first resembling _Lord Thomas and Fair Elinor_,
  and the second, _Fair Annie's Ghost_, is still more like the
  following ballad.

  Mr. Chappell remarks, "Another point deserving notice in the old
  ballad is that one part of it has furnished the principal subject
  of the modern burlesque ballad _Lord Lovel_, and another that of T.
  Hood's song, _Mary's Ghost_."]

       *       *       *       *       *

    As it fell out on a long summer's day
      Two lovers they sat on a hill;
    They sat together that long summer's day,
      And could not talk their fill.

    I see no harm by you, Margarèt,                                    5
      And you see none by mee;
    Before to-morrow at eight o' the clock
      A rich wedding you shall see.

    Fair Margaret sat in her bower-windòw,
      Combing her yellow hair;                                        10
    There she spyed sweet William and his bride,
      As they were a riding near.

    Then down she layd her ivory combe,
      And braided her hair in twain:
    She went alive out of her bower,                                  15
      But ne'er came alive in't again.

    When day was gone, and night was come,
      And all men fast asleep,
    Then came the spirit of fair Marg'ret,
      And stood at Williams feet.                                     20

    Are you awake, sweet William? shee said;
      Or, sweet William, are you asleep?
    God give you joy of your gay bride-bed,
      And me of my winding-sheet.

    When day was come, and night was gone,                            25
      And all men wak'd from sleep,
    Sweet William to his lady sayd,
      My dear, I have cause to weep.

    I dreamt a dream, my dear ladyè,
      Such dreames are never good:                                    30
    I dreamt my bower was full of red 'wine,'[319]
      And my bride-bed full of blood.

    Such dreams, such dreams, my honoured Sir,
      They never do prove good;
    To dream thy bower was full of red 'wine,'[319]                   35
      And thy bride-bed full of blood.

    He called up his merry men all,
      By one, by two, and by three;
    Saying, I'll away to fair Marg'ret's bower,
      By the leave of my ladiè.                                       40

    And when he came to fair Marg'ret's bower,
      He knocked at the ring;
    And who so ready as her seven brethrèn
      To let sweet William in.

    Then he turned up the covering-sheet,                             45
      Pray let me see the dead;
    Methinks she looks all pale and wan,
      She hath lost her cherry red.

    I'll do more for thee, Margarèt,
      Than any of thy kin;                                            50
    For I will kiss thy pale wan lips,
      Though a smile I cannot win.

    With that bespake the seven brethrèn,
      Making most piteous mone:
    You may go kiss your jolly brown bride,                           55
      And let our sister alone.

    If I do kiss my jolly brown bride,
      I do but what is right;
    I neer made a vow to yonder poor corpse
      By day, nor yet by night.                                       60

    Deal on, deal on, my merry men all,
      Deal on your cake and your wine[320]:
    For whatever is dealt at her funeral to-day,
      Shall be dealt to-morrow at mine.

    Fair Margaret dyed to-day, to-day,                                65
      Sweet William dyed the morrow:
    Fair Margaret dyed for pure true love,
      Sweet William dyed for sorrow.

    Margaret was buryed in the lower chancèl,
      And William in the higher:                                      70
    Out of her brest there sprang a rose,
      And out of his a briar.

    They grew till they grew unto the church-top,
      And then they could grow no higher;
    And there they tyed in a true lovers knot,                        75
      Which made all the people admire.

    Then came the clerk of the parìsh,
      As you the truth shall hear,
    And by misfortune cut them down,
      Or they had now been there.                                     80

FOOTNOTES:

[319] Ver. 31, 35. Swine, _PCC._

[320] Alluding to the dole anciently given at funerals.




V.

BARBARA ALLEN'S CRUELTY.


Given, with some corrections, from an old black letter copy, intitled,
_Barbara Allen's cruelty, or the young man's tragedy_.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [It is not clear why Percy separated this English version of
  _Barbara Allen_ from the Scottish version entitled _Sir John
  Grehme and Barbara Allan_ (No. 7).

  Goldsmith in his third Essay says, "the music of the finest singer
  is dissonance to what I felt when our dairy maid sung me into tears
  with _Johnny Armstrong's Last Good Night_, or the _Cruelty of
  Barbara Allen_."

  It has been suggested that for "Scarlet towne" in the first verse
  should be read Carlisle town, but as some printed copies have
  Reading town we may suppose that a pun is intended.]

       *       *       *       *       *

    In Scarlet towne, where I was borne,
      There was a faire maid dwellin,
    Made every youth crye, Wel-awaye!
      Her name was Barbara Allen.

    All in the merrye month of may,                                    5
      When greene buds they were swellin,
    Yong Jemmye Grove on his death-bed lay,
      For love of Barbara Allen.

    He sent his man unto her then,
      To the town, where shee was dwellin;                            10
    You must come to my master deare,
      Giff your name be Barbara Allen.

    For death is printed on his face,
      And ore his hart is stealin:
    Then haste away to comfort him,                                   15
      O lovelye Barbara Allen.

    Though death be printed on his face,
      And ore his harte is stealin,
    Yet little better shall he bee,
      For bonny Barbara Allen.                                        20

    So slowly, slowly, she came up,
      And slowly she came nye him;
    And all she sayd, when there she came,
      Young man, I think y'are dying.

    He turnd his face unto her strait,                                25
      With deadlye sorrow sighing;
    O lovely maid, come pity mee,
      Ime on my deth-bed lying.

    If on your death-bed you doe lye,
      What needs the tale you are tellin:                             30
    I cannot keep you from your death;
      Farewell, sayd Barbara Allen.

    He turnd his face unto the wall,
      As deadlye pangs he fell in:
    Adieu! adieu! adieu to you all,                                   35
      Adieu to Barbara Allen.

    As she was walking ore the fields,
      She heard the bell a knellin;
    And every stroke did seem to saye,
      Unworthy Barbara Allen.                                         40

    She turnd her bodye round about,
      And spied the corps a coming:
    Laye down, laye down the corps, she sayd
      That I may look upon him.

    With scornful eye she looked downe,                               45
      Her cheeke with laughter swellin;
    Whilst all her friends cryd out amaine,
      Unworthye Barbara Allen.

    When he was dead, and laid in grave,
      Her harte was struck with sorrowe,                              50
    O mother, mother, make my bed,
      For I shall dye to-morrowe.

    Hard harted creature him to slight,
      Who loved me so dearlye:
    O that I had beene more kind to him,                              55
      When he was alive and neare me!

    She, on her death-bed as she laye,
      Beg'd to be buried by him;
    And sore repented of the daye,
      That she did ere denye him.                                     60

    Farewell, she sayd, ye virgins all,
      And shun the fault I fell in:
    Henceforth take warning by the fall
      Of cruel Barbara Allen.




VI.

SWEET WILLIAM'S GHOST.


                           A SCOTTISH BALLAD.

From Allan Ramsay's _Tea-Table Miscellany_. The concluding stanza of
this piece seems modern.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [In the previous ballad (No. 4) and in Mallet's _William and
  Margaret_ it is Margaret who appears to William, but in the present
  one and in some other versions William is made to die first. In
  _Clerk Saunders_ (_Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border_) Scott has
  joined two distinct stories, and the second part, in which the
  spirit of Clerk Saunders appears to May Margaret, closely resembles
  the present ballad. Besides these there are two other versions.
  Kinloch's, entitled _Sweet William and May Margaret_, and
  Motherwell's _William and Marjorie_. Dr. Rimbault points out that
  the chief incidents in Bürger's _Leonora_ resemble those in this
  ballad.

  The last two stanzas are probably Ramsay's own.]

       *       *       *       *       *

    There came a ghost to Margaret's door,
      With many a grievous grone,
    And ay he tirled at the pin;[321]
      But answer made she none.

    Is this my father Philip?                                          5
      Or is't my brother John?
    Or is't my true love Willie,
      From Scotland new come home?

    'Tis not thy father Philip;
      Nor yet thy brother John:                                       10
    But tis thy true love Willie
      From Scotland new come home,

    O sweet Margret! O dear Margret!
      I pray thee speak to mee:
    Give me my faith and troth, Margret,                              15
      As I gave it to thee.

    Thy faith and troth thou'se nevir get,
      'Of me shalt nevir win,'
    Till that thou come within my bower,
      And kiss my cheek and chin.                                     20

    If I should come within thy bower,
      I am no earthly man:
    And should I kiss thy rosy lipp,
      Thy days will not be lang.

    O sweet Margret, O dear Margret,                                  25
      I pray thee speak to mee:
    Give me my faith and troth, Margret,
      As I gave it to thee.

    Thy faith and troth thou'se nevir get,
      'Of me shalt nevir win,'                                        30
    Till thou take me to yon kirk yard,
      And wed me with a ring.

    My bones are buried in a kirk yard
      Afar beyond the sea,
    And it is but my sprite, Margret,                                 35
      That's speaking now to thee.

    She stretched out her lilly-white hand,
      As for to do her best:
    Hae there your faith and troth, Willie,
      God send your soul good rest.                                   40

    Now she has kilted her robes of green,
      A piece below her knee:
    And a' the live-lang winter night
      The dead corps followed shee.

    Is there any room at your head, Willie?                           45
      Or any room at your feet?
    Or any room at your side, Willie,
      Wherein that I may creep?

    There's nae room at my head, Margret,
      There's nae room at my feet,                                    50
    There's no room at my side, Margret,
      My coffin is made so meet.

    Then up and crew the red red cock,
      And up then crew the gray:
    Tis time, tis time, my dear Margret,                              55
      That 'I' were gane away.

    [No more the ghost to Margret said,
      But, with a grievous grone,
    Evanish'd in a cloud of mist,
      And left her all alone.                                         60

    O stay, my only true love, stay,
      The constant Margret cried:
    Wan grew her cheeks, she clos'd her een,
      Stretch'd her saft limbs, and died.]

FOOTNOTES:

[321] [See note, _ante_, p. 47.]




VII.

SIR JOHN GREHME AND BARBARA ALLAN.


                           A SCOTTISH BALLAD.

Printed, with a few conjectural emendations, from a written copy.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [Pepys, in Jan. 1665-1666, heard Mrs. Knipp, the actress, sing "her
  little Scotch song of _Barbery Allen_" at Lord Brouncker's, and he
  was "in perfect pleasure to hear her sing" it. It was first printed
  in Ramsay's _Tea-Table Miscellany_ (ii. 171).

  "I remember," says Mr. C. Kirkpatrick Sharpe, "that the peasantry
  of Annandale sang many more verses of this ballad than have
  appeared in print, but they were of no merit, containing numerous
  magnificent offers from the lover to his mistress, and amongst
  others some ships in sight, which may strengthen the belief that
  this song was composed near the shores of the Solway."--_Addit._
  _Illustrations to Stenhouse._]

       *       *       *       *       *

    It was in and about the Martinmas time,
      When the greene leaves wer a fallan;
    That Sir John Grehme o' the west countrye,
      Fell in luve wi' Barbara Allan.

    He sent his man down throw the towne,                              5
      To the plaice wher she was dwellan:
    O haste and cum to my maister deare,
      Gin ye bin Barbara Allan.

    O hooly, hooly raise she up,
      To the plaice wher he was lyan;                                 10
    And whan she drew the curtain by,
      Young man, I think ye're dyan.[322]

    O its I'm sick, and very very sick,
      And its a' for Barbara Allan.
    O the better for me ye'se never be,                               15
      Though your harts blude wer spillan.

    Remember ye nat in the tavern, sir,
      Whan ye the cups wer fillan;
    How ye made the healths gae round and round,
      And slighted Barbara Allan?                                     20

    He turn'd his face unto the wa'
      And death was with him dealan;
    Adiew! adiew! my dear friends a',
      Be kind to Barbara Allan.

    Then hooly, hooly raise she up,                                   25
      And hooly, hooly left him;
    And sighan said, she could not stay,
      Since death of life had reft him.

    She had not gane a mile but twa,
      Whan she heard the deid-bell knellan;                           30
    And everye jow the deid-bell geid,
      Cried, Wae to Barbara Allan!

    O mither, mither, mak my bed,
      O make it saft and narrow:
    Since my love died for me to-day,                                 35
      Ise die for him to morrowe.

                                                                  [***]

FOOTNOTES:

[322] An ingenious friend thinks the rhymes _Dyand_ and _Lyand_ ought
to be transposed; as the taunt _Young man, I think ye're yand_, would
be very characteristical.




VIII.

THE BAILIFF'S DAUGHTER OF ISLINGTON.


From an ancient black-letter copy in the Pepys _Collection_, with some
improvements communicated by a lady as she had heard the same recited
in her youth. The full title is, _True love requited: Or, the Bailiff's
daughter of Islington_.

_Islington_ in Norfolk is probably the place here meant.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [Copies of this charming old ballad are found in all the large
  collections, and two tunes are associated with it.

  Percy's suggestion that Islington in Norfolk is referred to is
  not a probable one, and there seems to be no reason for depriving
  the better known Islington of the south of the honour of having
  given birth to the bailiff's daughter. Islington at the time when
  this ballad was written was a country village quite unconnected
  with London, and a person who represented "a squier minstrel of
  Middlesex" made a speech before Queen Elizabeth at Kenilworth in
  1575, in which he declared "how the worshipful village of Islington
  [was] well knooen too bee one of the most auncient and best tounz
  in England, next to London."]

       *       *       *       *       *

    There was a youthe, and a well-beloved youthe,
      And he was a squires son;
    He loved the bayliffes daughter deare,
      That lived in Islington.

    Yet she was coye and would not believe                             5
      That he did love her soe,
    Noe nor at any time would she
      Any countenance to him showe.

    But when his friendes did understand
      His fond and foolish minde,                                     10
    They sent him up to faire London
      An apprentice for to binde.

    And when he had been seven long yeares,
      And never his love could see:
    Many a teare have I shed for her sake,                            15
      When she little thought of mee.

    Then all the maids of Islington
      Went forth to sport and playe,
    All but the bayliffes daughter deare;
      She secretly stole awaye.                                       20

    She pulled off her gowne of greene,
      And put on ragged attire,
    And to faire London she would go
      Her true love to enquire.

    And as she went along the high road,                              25
      The weather being hot and drye,
    She sat her downe upon a green bank,
      And her true love came riding bye.

    She started up, with a colour soe redd,
      Catching hold of his bridle-reine;                              30
    One penny, one penny, kind sir, she sayd,
      Will ease me of much paine.

    Before I give you one penny, sweet-heart,
      Praye tell me where you were borne.
    At Islington, kind sir, sayd shee,                                35
      Where I have had many a scorne.

    I prythee, sweet-heart, then tell to mee,
      O tell me, whether you knowe
    The bayliffes daughter of Islington,
      She is dead, sir, long agoe.                                    40

    If she be dead, then take my horse,
      My saddle and bridle also;
    For I will into some farr countrye,
      Where noe man shall me knowe.

    O staye, O staye, thou goodlye youthe,                            45
      She standeth by thy side;
    She is here alive, she is not dead,
      And readye to be thy bride.

    O farewell griefe, and welcome joye,
      Ten thousand times therefore;                                   50
    For nowe I have founde mine owne true love,
      Whom I thought I should never see more.




IX.

THE WILLOW TREE.


                          A PASTORAL DIALOGUE.

From the small black-letter collection, intitled, _The Golden Garland
of princely delights_; collated with two other copies, and corrected by
conjecture.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [Dr. Rimbault gives the melody of this pretty little pastoral on
  the favourite subject of wearing the willow from a MS. dated 1639
  in the Advocate's Library, Edinburgh. It is also to be found in
  the celebrated Skene MS. in the same library, and again in all the
  editions of Forbes's _Cantus_.]

       *       *       *       *       *

                                 WILLY.

    How now, shepherde, what meanes that?
    Why that willowe in thy hat?
    Why thy scarffes of red and yellowe
    Turn'd to branches of greene willowe?

                                 CUDDY.

    They are chang'd, and so am I;                                     5
    Sorrowes live, but pleasures die:
    Phillis hath forsaken mee,
    Which makes me weare the willowe-tree.

                                 WILLY.

    Phillis! shee that lov'd thee long?
    Is shee the lass hath done thee wrong?                            10
    Shee that lov'd thee long and best,
    Is her love turn'd to a jest?

                                 CUDDY.

    Shee that long true love profest,
    She hath robb'd my heart of rest:
    For she a new love loves, not mee;                                15
    Which makes me wear the willowe-tree.

                                 WILLY.

    Come then, shepherde, let us joine,
    Since thy happ is like to mine:
    For the maid I thought most true,
    Mee hath also bid adieu.                                          20

                                 CUDDY.

    Thy hard happ doth mine appease,
    Companye doth sorrowe ease:
    Yet, Phillis, still I pine for thee,
    And still must weare the willowe-tree.

                                 WILLY.

    Shepherde, be advis'd by mee,                                     25
    Cast off grief and willowe-tree:
    For thy grief brings her content,
    She is pleas'd if thou lament.

                                 CUDDY.

    Herdsman, I'll be rul'd by thee,
    There lyes grief and willowe-tree:                                30
    Henceforth I will do as they,
    And love a new love every day.




X.

THE LADY'S FALL


Is given (with corrections) from the Editor's ancient folio MS.[323]
collated with two printed copies in black-letter; one in the British
Museum, the other in the Pepys Collection. Its old title is, _A
lamentable ballad of the Lady's fall_. To the tune of, _In Pescod
time, &c._--The ballad here referred to is preserved in the _Muses
Library_, 8vo. p. 281. It is an allegory or vision, intitled, _The
Shepherd's Slumber_, and opens with some pretty rural images, viz.

    "In pescod time when hound to horn
      Gives eare till buck be kil'd,
    And little lads with pipes of corne
      Sate keeping beasts a-field."

    "I went to gather strawberries
    By woods and groves full fair, &c."

       *       *       *       *       *

  [Mr. Hales thinks it possible that this ballad was written by the
  same author as _The Children in the Wood_--"the same facility of
  language and of rhyme, the same power of pathos, the same extreme
  simplicity characterise both ballads."

  Mr. Chappell says that _Chevy Chace_ was sometimes sung to the tune
  of _In Pescod time_, as were the _Bride's burial_ (No. 12), and
  _Lady Isabella's Tragedy_ (No. 14). The various readings from the
  original MS. are noted at the foot of the page.]

       *       *       *       *       *

    Marke well my heavy dolefull tale,
      You loyall lovers all,
    And heedfully beare in your brest,
      A gallant ladyes fall.
    Long was she wooed, ere shee was wonne,                            5
      To lead a wedded life,
    But folly wrought her overthrowe
      Before she was a wife.

    Too soone, alas! shee gave consent
      And yeelded to his will,                                        10
    Though he protested to be true,
      And faithfull to her still.
    Shee felt her body altered quite,
      Her bright hue waxed pale,
    Her lovelye cheeks chang'd color white,[324]                      15
      Her strength began to fayle.

    Soe that with many a sorrowful sigh,[325]
      This beauteous ladye milde,
    With greeved hart, perceived herselfe
      To have conceived with childe.[326]                             20
    Shee kept it from her parents sight
      As close as close might bee,
    And soe put on her silken gowne
      None might her swelling see.[327]

    Unto her lover secretly                                           25
      Her greefe shee did bewray,
    And walking with him hand in hand,
      These words to him did say;
    Behold, quoth shee, a maids distresse[328]
      By love brought to thy bowe;[329]                               30
    Behold I goe with childe by thee,[330]
      Tho none thereof doth knowe.

    The litle babe springs in my wombe[331]
      To heare its fathers voyce,
    Lett it not be a bastard called,[332]                             35
      Sith I made thee my choyce:
    [Come, come, my love, perform thy vowe[333]
      And wed me out of hand;[333]
    O leave me not in this extreme[333]
      Of griefe, alas! to stand.][333]                                40

    Think on thy former promises,
      Thy oathes and vowes eche one;[334]
    Remember with what bitter teares
      To mee thou madest thy moane.
    Convay me to some secrett place,                                  45
      And marry me with speede;
    Or with thy rapyer end my life,
      Ere further shame proceede.[335]

    Alacke! my beauteous love, quoth hee,[336]
      My joye, and only dear;[337]                                    50
    Which way can I convay thee hence,[338]
      When dangers are so near?[339]
    Thy friends are all of hye degree,[340]
      And I of meane estate;
    Full hard it is to gett thee forthe[341]                          55
      Out of thy fathers gate.[342]

    Dread not thy life to save my fame,[343]
      For if thou taken bee,[344]
    My selfe will step betweene the swords,[345]
      And take the harme on mee:[346]                                 60
    Soe shall I scape dishonor quite;[347]
      And if I should be slaine[348]
    What could they say, but that true love
      Had wrought a ladyes bane.[349]

    But feare not any further harme;                                  65
      My selfe will soe devise,
    That I will ryde away with thee[350]
      Unknowen of mortall eyes:
    Disguised like some pretty page
      Ile meete thee in the darke,                                    70
    And all alone Ile come to thee
      Hard by my fathers parke.

    And there, quoth hee, Ile meete my deare
      If God soe lend me life,
    On this day month without all fayle                               75
      I will make thee my wife.[351]
    Then with a sweet and loving kisse,[352]
      They parted presentlye,
    And att their partinge brinish teares
      Stoode in eche others eye,                                      80

    Att length the wished day was come,[353]
      On which this beauteous mayd,
    With longing eyes, and strange attire,
      For her true lover stayd.
    When any person shee espyed[354]                                  85
      Come ryding ore the plaine,[355]
    She hop'd it was her owne true love:[356]
      But all her hopes were vaine.

    Then did shee weepe and sore bewayle
      Her most unhappy fate;                                          90
    Then did shee speake these woefull words,
      As succourless she sate;[357]
    O false, forsworne, and faithlesse man,[358]
      Disloyall in thy love,
    Hast thou forgott thy promise past,                               95
      And wilt thou perjured prove?

    And hast thou now forsaken mee
      In this my great distresse,
    To end my dayes in open shame,[359]
      Which thou mightst well redresse?[360]                         100
    Woe worth the time I eer believ'd[361]
      That flattering tongue of thine:
    Wold God that I had never seene
      The teares of thy false eyne.

    And thus with many a sorrowful sigh,[362]                        105
      Homewards shee went againe;[363]
    Noe rest came in her waterye eyes,
      Shee felt such privye paine.[364]
    In travail strong shee fell that night,
      With many a bitter throwe;[365]                                110
    What woefull paines shee then did feel,[366]
      Doth eche good woman knowe.

    Shee called up her waiting mayd,[367]
      That lay at her bedds feete,[368]
    Who musing at her mistress woe,[369]                             115
      Began full fast to weepe.
    Weepe not, said shee, but shutt the dores,[370]
      And windowes round about,[371]
    Let none bewray my wretched state,
      But keepe all persons out.                                     120

    O mistress, call your mother deare;
      Of women you have neede,
    And of some skilfull midwifes helpe,[372]
      That better may you speed.[373]
    Call not my mother for thy life,                                 125
      Nor fetch no woman here;
    The midwives helpe comes all too late,
      My death I doe not feare.

    With that the babe sprang from her wombe
      No creature being nye,[374]                                    130
    And with one sighe, which brake her hart,
      This gentle dame did dye.[375]
    The lovely litle infant younge,[376]
      [The mother being dead,][377]
    Resigned its new received breath,                                135
      To him that had it made.

    Next morning came her own true love,
      Affrighted at the newes,[378]
    And he for sorrow slew himselfe,
      Whom eche one did accuse.                                      140
    The mother with her new borne babe,
      Were laide both in one grave:
    Their parents overworne with woe,
      No joy thenceforth cold have.[379]

    Take heed, you dayntye damsells all,                             145
      Of flattering words beware,
    And to the honour of your name
      Have an especial care.[380]
    [Too true, alas! this story is,[381]
      As many one can tell:[381]                                     150
    By others harmes learne to be wise,[381]
      And you shall do full well.][381]

FOOTNOTES:

[323] [Ed. Hales and Furnivall, vol. ii. p. 246.]

[324] [Ver. 15. her faire red cheekes changed color quite.]

[325] [V. 17. and soe with.]

[326] [V. 20. to be conceived.]

[327] [V. 24. none shold. MS.]

[328] [Ver. 29. a ladyes distress.]

[329] [V. 30. your bowe.]

[330] [V. 31. See how I goe with chyld with thee.]

[331] [V. 33. my litle.]

[332] [V. 35. O lett.]

[333] [V. 37-40. not in MS.]

[334] [V. 42. thy wordes.]

[335] [V. 48. lest further.]

[336] [V. 49. my derest.]

[337] [V. 50. my greatest joy on earthe.]

[338] [V. 51. shold I convay you.]

[339] [V. 52. to scape a sudden death.]

[340] [Ver. 53. your friends.]

[341] [V. 55. gett you.]

[342] [V. 56. your ffathers.]

[343] [V. 57. your liffe ... your fame.]

[344] [V. 58. you.]

[345] [V. 59. sword.]

[346] [V. 60. to take ... of thee.]

[347] [V. 61. soe may you.]

[348] [V. 62. if soe you.]

[349] [V. 64. ladyes paine.]

[350] [V. 67. I will safely ryd with thee.]

[351] [V. 76. Ile make the then.]

[352] [V. 77. and with.]

[353] [Ver. 81. wherin this lovely maid.]

[354] [V. 85. if any person shee had spyed.]

[355] [V. 86. came.]

[356] [V. 87. shee thought.]

[357] [V. 92. when succourles.]

[358] [V. 93. _and_ not in MS.]

[359] [V. 99. in heavinesse.]

[360] [V. 100. which well thou might.]

[361] [V. 101. I did beleeve.]

[362] [V. 105. soe that with many a grievous groane.]

[363] [V. 106. amaine.]

[364] [V. 108. shee found.]

[365] [Ver. 110. thraw.]

[366] [V. 111. shee felt that night.]

[367] [V. 113. mayd.]

[368] [V. 114. who lay.]

[369] [V. 115. and musing at her great woe.]

[370] [V. 117. shee sayth.]

[371] [V. 118. all about.]

[372] [V. 123. and to some.]

[373] [V. 124. the better.]

[374] [V. 130. being by.]

[375] [V. 132. gallant dame.]

[376] [V. 133. litle lovely.]

[377] [V. 134. the pretty smiling babe.]

[378] [Ver. 138. with this newes.]

[379] [V. 144. no joy that they.]

[380] [V. 148. have you a specyall care.]

[381] [V. 149-152. not in MS.]




XI.

WALY WALY, LOVE BE BONNY.


                            A SCOTTISH SONG.

This is a very ancient song, but we could only give it from a modern
copy. Some editions instead of the four last lines in the second stanza
have these, which have too much merit to be wholly suppressed:

    "Whan cockle shells turn siller bells,
      And muscles grow on every tree,
    When frost and snaw sall warm us aw',
      Than sall my love prove true to me."

                                 See the _Orpheus Caledonius, &c._

Arthur's-seat mentioned in ver. 17, is a hill near Edinborough; near
the bottom of which is St. Anthony's well.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [There has been considerable difference of opinion among ballad
  collectors relative to this beautiful song. Some suppose it to
  be a portion of the ballad entitled _Lord Jamie Douglas_, which
  relates to James Douglas, second Marquis of Douglas, who married
  Lady Barbara Erskine, eldest daughter of John, ninth Earl of Mar,
  on the seventh of September, 1670, and afterwards repudiated her
  on account of a false accusation of adultery made against her by
  Lowrie, laird of Blackwood. Prof. Aytoun, however, believes that
  certain verses of _Waly Waly_ have wrongly been mixed up with
  _Lord Jamie Douglas_. There is very little doubt that the song
  was in existence long before 1670, and it also appears to be the
  lamentation of a forsaken girl rather than of a wife. Mr. Stenhouse
  and others considered it to belong to the age of Queen Mary and
  to refer to some affair at Court. Aytoun writes, "there is also
  evidence that it was composed before 1566, for there is extant
  a MS. of that year in which some of the lines are transcribed,"
  but Mr. Maidment gives the following opinion--"that the ballad is
  of ancient date is undoubted, but we are not quite prepared to
  admit that it goes back as far as 1566, the date of the manuscript
  transcribed by Thomas Wode from an ancient church music book
  compiled by Dean John Angus, Andrew Blackhall, and others, in which
  it said the first [second] stanza is thus parodied:--

    Hey trollie lollie, love is jollie,
      A quhile, quhil itt is new
    Quhen it is old, it grows full cold,
      Wae worth the love untrue.

  Never having had access to the MS., we may be permitted to remark
  that the phraseology of the burlesque is not exactly that of the
  reign of Queen Mary" (_Scottish Ballads and Songs_, 1868, vol. ii.
  p. 49.)

  Allan Ramsay was the first to publish the song, and he marked it as
  ancient.

    "When cockle shells turn silver bells,
      When wine drieps red frae ilka tree,
    When frost and snaw will warm us a'
      Then I'll cum down and dine wi' thee,"

  is the fourth stanza of _Jamie Douglas_, printed by John Finlay, in
  his _Scottish Historical and Romantic Ballads_ (vol. ii.)]

       *       *       *       *       *

    O waly[382] waly up the bank,
      And waly waly down the brae,
    And waly waly yon burn side,
      Where I and my love wer wont to gae.
    I leant my back unto an aik,                                       5
      I thought it was a trusty tree;
    But first it bow'd, and syne it brak,
      Sae my true love did lichtly me.

    O waly, waly, gin love be bonny,
      A little time while it is new;                                  10
    But when its auld, it waxeth cauld,
      And fades awa' like morning dew.
    O wherfore shuld I busk my head?
      Or wherfore shuld I kame my hair?
    For my true love has me forsook,                                  15
      And says he'll never loe me mair.

    Now Arthur-seat sall be my bed,
      The sheets shall neir be fyl'd[383] by me:
    Saint Anton's well sall be my drink,
      Since my true love has forsaken me.                             20
    Marti'mas wind, when wilt thou blaw,
      And shake the green leaves aff the tree?
    O gentle death, whan wilt thou cum?
      For of my life I am wearìe.

    Tis not the frost, that freezes fell,                             25
      Nor blawing snaws inclemencìe;
    'Tis not sic cauld, that makes me cry,
      But my loves heart grown cauld to me.
    When we came in by Glasgowe town,
      We were a comely sight to see,                                  30
    My love was cled in black velvet,
      And I my-sell in cramasie.[384]

    But had I wist, before I kisst,
      That love had been sae ill to win;
    I had lockt my heart in a case of gowd,                           35
      And pinnd it with a siller pin.
    And, oh! if my young babe were born,
      And set upon the nurses knee,
    And I my sell were dead and gane!
      For a maid again Ise never be.                                  40

FOOTNOTES:

[382] [interjection of lamentation.]

[383] [defiled.]

[384] [crimson.]




XII.

THE BRIDE'S BURIAL.


From two ancient copies in black-letter: one in the Pepys Collection;
the other in the British Museum.

                   To the tune of _The Lady's Fall_.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Come mourne, come mourne with mee,
      You loyall lovers all;
    Lament my loss in weeds of woe,
      Whom griping grief doth thrall.

    Like to the drooping vine,                                         5
      Cut by the gardener's knife,
    Even so my heart, with sorrow slaine,
      Doth bleed for my sweet wife.

    By death, that grislye ghost,
      My turtle dove is slaine,                                       10
    And I am left, unhappy man,
      To spend my dayes in paine.

    Her beauty late so bright,
      Like roses in their prime,
    Is wasted like the mountain snowe,                                15
      Before warme Phebus' shine.

    Her faire red colour'd cheeks
      Now pale and wan; her eyes,
    That late did shine like crystal stars;
      Alas, their light it dies:                                      20

    Her prettye lilly hands,
      With fingers long and small,
    In colour like the earthly claye,
      Yea, cold and stiff withall.

    When as the morning star                                          25
      Her golden gates had spred,
    And that the glittering sun arose
      Forth from fair Thetis' bed;

    Then did my love awake,
      Most like a lilly-flower,                                       30
    And as the lovely queene of heaven,
      So shone shee in her bower.

    Attired was shee then,
      Like Flora in her pride,
    Like one of bright Diana's nymphs,                                35
      So look'd my loving bride.

    And as fair Helen's face,
      Did Grecian dames besmirche,
    So did my dear exceed in sight,
      All virgins in the church.                                      40

    When we had knitt the knott
      Of holy wedlock-band,
    Like alabaster joyn'd to jett,
      So stood we hand in hand;

    Then lo! a chilling cold                                          45
      Strucke every vital part,
    And griping grief, like pangs of death,
      Seiz'd on my true love's heart.

    Down in a swoon she fell,
      As cold as any stone;                                           50
    Like Venus picture lacking life,
      So was my love brought home.

    At length her rosye red,
      Throughout her comely face,
    As Ph[oe]bus beames with watry cloudes                            55
      Was cover'd for a space.

    When with a grievous groane,
      And voice both hoarse and drye,
    Farewell, quoth she, my loving friend,
      For I this daye must dye;                                       60

    The messenger of God,
      With golden trumpe I see,
    With manye other angels more,
      Which sound and call for mee.

    Instead of musicke sweet,                                         65
      Go toll my passing-bell;
    And with sweet flowers strow my grave,
      That in my chamber smell.

    Strip off my bride's arraye,
      My cork shoes from my feet;                                     70
    And, gentle mother, be not coye
      To bring my winding-sheet.

    My wedding dinner drest,
      Bestowe upon the poor,
    And on the hungry, needy, maimde,                                 75
      Now craving at the door.

    Instead of virgins yong,
      My bride-bed for to see,
    Go cause some cunning carpenter,
      To make a chest for mee.                                        80

    My bride laces of silk
      Bestowd, for maidens meet,
    May fitly serve, when I am dead,
      To tye my hands and feet.

    And thou, my lover true,                                          85
      My husband and my friend,
    Let me intreat thee here to staye,
      Until my life doth end.

    Now leave to talk of love,
      And humblye on your knee,                                       90
    Direct your prayers unto God:
      But mourn no more for mee.

    In love as we have livde,
      In love let us depart;
    And I, in token of my love,                                       95
      Do kiss thee with my heart.

    O staunch those bootless teares,
      Thy weeping tis in vaine;
    I am not lost, for wee in heaven
      Shall one daye meet againe.                                    100

    With that shee turn'd aside,
      As one dispos'd to sleep,
    And like a lamb departed life;
      Whose friends did sorely weep.

    Her true love seeing this,                                       105
      Did fetch a grievous groane,
    As tho' his heart would burst in twaine,
      And thus he made his moane.

    O darke and dismal daye,
      A daye of grief and care,                                      110
    That hath bereft the sun so bright,
      Whose beams refresht the air.

    Now woe unto the world,
      And all that therein dwell,
    O that I were with thee in heaven,                               115
      For here I live in hell.

    And now this lover lives
      A discontented life,
    Whose bride was brought unto the grave
      A maiden and a wife.                                           120

    A garland fresh and faire
      Of lillies there was made,
    In sign of her virginitye,
      And on her coffin laid.[385]

    Six maidens, all in white,                                       125
      Did beare her to the ground:
    The bells did ring in solemn sort,
      And made a dolefull sound.

    In earth they laid her then,
      For hungry wormes a preye;                                     130
    So shall the fairest face alive
      At length be brought to claye.

FOOTNOTES:

[385] ["It was an ancient and pleasing custom to place a garland made
of white flowers and white riband upon the coffin of a maiden; it was
afterwards hung up over her customary seat in church. Sometimes a
pair of white gloves, or paper cut to the shape of gloves, was hung
beneath the garland. Chaplets of the kind still hang in some of the
Derbyshire churches, and at Hathersage in that county the custom is
still retained."--(_Transactions of the Essex Archælogical Society_,
vol. i. 1858, p. 118.) See _Corydon's Doleful Knell_, vol. ii.
book ii. No. 27, p. 275. Ophelia is "allowed her virgin crants" (or
garland)--_Hamlet_, act v. sc. 1. See also an interesting article on
_Funeral Garlands_ by Llewellyn Jewitt in the _Reliquary_, vol. i.
(1860), p. 5.]




XIII.

DULCINA.


Given from two ancient copies, one in black-print, in the Pepys
Collection: the other in the Editor's folio MS. Each of these contained
a stanza not found in the other. What seemed the best readings were
selected from both.

This song is quoted as very popular in Walton's _Compleat Angler_,
chap. ii. It is more ancient than the ballad of _Robin Good-Fellow_
printed below, which yet is supposed to have been written by Ben.
Jonson.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [The Milk-woman in Walton's _Angler_ says, "What song was it, I
  pray you? Was it _Come shepherds deck your heads_, or _As at noon
  Dulcina rested_?"

  In the Registers of the Stationers' Company, under date of May 22,
  1615, there is an entry transferring the right of publication from
  one printer to another of _A Ballett of Dulcina to the tune of_
  _Forgoe me nowe, come to me sone_. Mr. Chappell also tells us that
  _Dulcina_ was one of the tunes to the "Psalms and Songs of Sion,
  turned into the language and set to the tunes of a strange land,"
  1642.

  The editors of the Folio MS., more scrupulous than the bishop, have
  not printed this song in its proper place, but have turned it into
  the Supplement of _Loose and Humourous Songs_ (p. 32). The third
  stanza of the MS. beginning

    "Words whose hopes might have enjoyned"

  is not printed in the present copy. The third stanza here is the
  fourth of the MS., and the fourth stanza is not in the MS. at all.

  Cayley and Ellis attribute this song to Raleigh, but without
  sufficient authority.]

       *       *       *       *       *

    As at noone Dulcina rested
      In her sweete and shady bower;
    Came a shepherd, and requested
      In her lapp to sleepe an hour.
          But from her looke                                           5
          A wounde he tooke

      Soe deepe, that for a further boone
        The nymph he prayes.
        Wherto shee sayes,
    Forgoe me now, come to me soone.                                  10

    But in vayne shee did conjure him
      To depart her presence soe;
    Having a thousand tongues to allure him,
      And but one to bid him goe:
          Where lipps invite,                                         15
          And eyes delight,
      And cheekes, as fresh as rose in june,
          Persuade delay;
          What boots, she say,
      Forgoe me now, come to me soone?                                20

    He demands what time for pleasure
      Can there be more fit than now:
    She sayes, night gives love that leysure,
      Which the day can not allow.
          He sayes, the sight                                         25
          'Improves delight.
      'Which she denies: Nights mirkie noone
          In Venus' playes
          Makes bold, shee sayes;
      Forgoe me now, come to mee soone.                               30

    But what promise or profession
      From his hands could purchase scope?
    Who would sell the sweet possession
      Of suche beautye for a hope?
          Or for the sight                                            35
          Of lingering night
      Foregoe the present joyes of noone?
          Though ne'er soe faire
          Her speeches were,
    Forgoe me now, come to me soone.                                  40

    How, at last, agreed these lovers?
      Shee was fayre, and he was young:
    The tongue may tell what th'eye discovers;
      Joyes unseene are never sung.
          Did shee consent,                                           45
          Or he relent;
      Accepts he night, or grants shee noone;
          Left he her a mayd,
          Or not; she sayd
      Forgoe me now, come to me soone.                                50




XIV.

THE LADY ISABELLA'S TRAGEDY.


This ballad is given from an old black-letter copy in the Pepys
Collection, collated with another in the British Museum, H. 263,
folio. It is there intitled, "_The Lady Isabella's Tragedy, or the
Step-Mother's Cruelty_: being a relation of a lamentable and cruel
murther, committed on the body of the lady Isabella, the only daughter
of a noble duke, &c. To the tune of, _The Lady's Fall_." To some copies
are annexed eight more modern stanzas, intitled, _The Dutchess's and
Cook's Lamentation_.

       *       *       *       *       *

    There was a lord of worthy fame,
      And a hunting he would ride,
    Attended by a noble traine
      Of gentrye by his side.

    And while he did in chase remaine,                                 5
      To see both sport and playe;
    His ladye went, as she did feigne,
      Unto the church to praye.

    This lord he had a daughter deare,
      Whose beauty shone so bright,                                   10
    She was belov'd, both far and neare,
      Of many a lord and knight.

    Fair Isabella was she call'd,
      A creature faire was shee;
    She was her father's only joye;                                   15
      As you shall after see.

    Therefore her cruel step-mothèr
      Did envye her so much;
    That daye by daye she sought her life,
      Her malice it was such.                                         20

    She bargain'd with the master-cook,
      To take her life awaye:
    And taking of her daughters book,
      She thus to her did saye.

    Go home, sweet daughter, I thee praye,                            25
      Go hasten presentlie;
    And tell unto the master-cook
      These wordes that I tell thee.

    And bid him dresse to dinner streight
      That faire and milk-white doe,                                  30
    That in the parke doth shine so bright,
      There's none so faire to showe.

    This ladye fearing of no harme,
      Obey'd her mothers will;
    And presentlye she hasted home,                                   35
      Her pleasure to fulfill.

    She streight into the kitchen went,
      Her message for to tell;
    And there she spied the master-cook,
      Who did with malice swell.                                      40

    Nowe, master-cook, it must be soe,
      Do that which I thee tell:
    You needes must dresse the milk-white doe,
      Which you do knowe full well.

    Then streight his cruell bloodye hands,                           45
      He on the ladye layd;
    Who quivering and shaking stands,
      While thus to her he sayd:

    Thou art the doe, that I must dresse;
      See here, behold my knife;                                      50
    For it is pointed presently
      To rid thee of thy life.

    O then, cried out the scullion-boye,
      As loud as loud might bee;
    O save her life, good master-cook,                                55
      And make your pyes of mee!

    For pityes sake do not destroye
      My ladye with your knife;
    You know shee is her father's joye,
      For Christes sake save her life.                                60

    I will not save her life, he sayd,
      Nor make my pyes of thee;
    Yet if thou dost this deed bewraye,
      Thy butcher I will bee.

    Now when this lord he did come home                               65
      For to sit downe and eat;
    He called for his daughter deare,
      To come and carve his meat.

    Now sit you downe, his ladye sayd,
      O sit you downe to meat:                                        70
    Into some nunnery she is gone;
      Your daughter deare forget.

    Then solemnlye he made a vowe,
      Before the companìe:
    That he would neither eat nor drinke,                             75
      Until he did her see.

    O then bespake the scullion-boye,
      With a loud voice so hye:
    If now you will your daughter see,
      My lord, cut up that pye:                                       80

    Wherein her fleshe is minced small,
      And parched with the fire:
    All caused by her step-mothèr,
      Who did her death desire.

    And cursed bee the master-cook,                                   85
      O cursed may he bee!
    I proffered him my own hearts blood,
      From death to set her free.

    Then all in blacke this lord did mourne;
      And for his daughters sake,                                     90
    He judged her cruell step-mothèr
      To be burnt at a stake.

    Likewise he judg'd the master-cook
      In boiling lead to stand;
    And made the simple scullion-boye                                 95
      The heire of all his land.




XV.

A HUE AND CRY AFTER CUPID.


This song is a kind of translation of a pretty poem of Tasso's, called
_Amore fuggitivo_, generally printed with his _Aminta_, and originally
imitated from the first Idyllium of Moschus.

It is extracted from Ben Jonson's Masque at the marriage of lord
viscount Hadington, on Shrove-Tuesday, 1608. One stanza full of dry
mythology is here omitted, as it had been dropped in a copy of this
song printed in a small volume called _Le Prince d'Amour_. Lond.
1660, 8vo.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [The stanza of the first Grace which Percy left out is as follows:--

    "At his sight the sun hath turn'd,
    Neptune in the waters burn'd;
    Hell hath felt a greater heat;
    Jove himself forsook his seat:
    From the centre to the sky
    Are his trophies reared high."]

       *       *       *       *       *

    [_1 Grace._] Beauties have yee seen a toy,
    Called Love, a little boy,
    Almost naked, wanton, blinde;
    Cruel now; and then as kinde?
    If he be amongst yee, say;                                         5
    He is Venus' run away.

    [_2 Grace._] Shee, that will but now discover
    Where the winged wag doth hover,
    Shall to-night receive a kisse,
    How and where herselfe would wish:                                10
    But who brings him to his mother
    Shall have that kisse, and another.

    [_3 Grace._] Markes he hath about him plentie;
    You may know him among twentie:
    All his body is a fire,                                           15
    And his breath a flame entire:
    Which, being shot, like lightning, in,
    Wounds the heart, but not the skin.

           *       *       *       *       *

    [_2 Grace._] Wings he hath, which though yee clip,
    He will leape from lip to lip,                                    20
    Over liver, lights, and heart;
    Yet not stay in any part.
    And, if chance his arrow misses,
    He will shoot himselfe in kisses.

    [_3 Grace._] He doth beare a golden bow,                          25
    And a quiver hanging low,
    Full of arrowes, which outbrave
    Dian's shafts; where, if he have
    Any head more sharpe than other,
    With that first he strikes his mother.                            30

    [_1 Grace._] Still the fairest are his fuell,
    When his daies are to be cruell;
    Lovers hearts are all his food,
    And his baths their warmest bloud:
    Nought but wounds his hand doth season,                           35
    And he hates none like to Reason.

    [_2 Grace._] Trust him not: his words, though sweet,
    Seldome with his heart doe meet:
    All his practice is deceit;
    Everie gift is but a bait;                                        40
    Not a kisse but poyson beares;
    And most treason's in his teares.

    [_3 Grace._] Idle minutes are his raigne;
    Then the straggler makes his gaine,
    By presenting maids with toyes                                    45
    And would have yee thinke hem joyes;
    'Tis the ambition of the elfe
    To have all childish as himselfe.

    [_1 Grace._] If by these yee please to know him,
    Beauties, be not nice, but show him.                              50
    [_2 Grace._] Though ye had a will to hide him,
    Now, we hope, yee'le not abide him.
    [_3 Grace._] Since yee heare this falser's play,
    And that he is Venus' run-away.




XVI.

THE KING OF FRANCE'S DAUGHTER.


The story of this ballad seems to be taken from an incident in the
domestic history of Charles the Bald, king of France. His daughter
Judith was betrothed to Ethelwulph king of England: but before the
marriage was consummated, Ethelwulph died, and she returned to France:
whence she was carried off by Baldwyn, Forester of Flanders; who, after
many crosses and difficulties, at length obtained the king's consent to
their marriage, and was made Earl of Flanders. This happened about A.D.
863.--See Rapin, Henault, and the French historians.

The following copy is given from the Editor's ancient folio MS.
collated with another in black-letter in the Pepys Collection,
intitled, _An excellent Ballad of a prince of England's courtship to
the king of France's daughter, &c._ To the tune of _Crimson Velvet_.

Many breaches having been made in this old song by the hand of time,
principally (as might be expected) in the quick returns of the rhime;
an attempt is here made to repair them.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [This ballad was written by Thomas Deloney, who included it in his
  _Garland of Goodwill_ (Percy Society, vol. xxx. p. 52). It is,
  as Percy points out, founded on history, but Deloney paid little
  attention to facts. All the first part of the poem, which tells
  of the miserable end of the English prince of suitable age to the
  young French princess, is fiction. Judith was Ethelwulf's wife for
  about two years, and on the death of her husband she married his
  son Ethelbert. The only historical fact that is followed in the
  ballad is the marriage of Judith with Baldwin, Great Forester of
  France, from which union descended Matilda, the wife of William the
  Conqueror.

  The copy in the Folio MS. (ed. Hales and Furnivall, vol. iii.
  p. 441) is entitled "In the Dayes of Olde." Percy altered it
  considerably, sometimes following the printed copy and sometimes
  the MS.

  Mr. Hales suggests that the name of the tune is derived from the
  dress of the princess, described in vv. 185-6,--

    "Their mothers riche array
    Was of crimson velvet,"

  and Mr. Chappell agrees with him.]

       *       *       *       *       *

    In the dayes of old,
      When faire France did flourish,
    Storyes plaine have told,
      Lovers felt annoye.
    The queene a daughter bare,                                        5
      Whom beautye's queene did nourish:
    She was lovelye faire
      She was her father's joye.
    A prince of England came,
    Whose deeds did merit fame,                                       10
      But he was exil'd, and outcast:
    Love his soul did fire,
    Shee granted his desire,
      Their hearts in one were linked fast.
    Which when her father proved,                                     15
    Sorelye he was moved,
      And tormented in his minde.
    He sought for to prevent them;
    And, to discontent them,
      Fortune cross'd these lovers kinde.                             20

    When these princes twaine
      Were thus barr'd of pleasure,
    Through the kinges disdaine,
      Which their joyes withstoode:
    The lady soone prepar'd                                           25
      Her jewells and her treasure;
    Having no regard
      For state and royall bloode;
    In homelye poore array
    She went from court away,                                         30
      To meet her joye and hearts delight;
    Who in a forest great
    Had taken up his seat,
      To wayt her coming in the night.
    But, lo! what sudden danger                                       35
    To this princely stranger
      Chanced, as he sate alone!
    By outlawes he was robbed,
    And with ponyards stabbed,
      Uttering many a dying grone.                                    40

    The princesse, arm'd by love,
      And by chaste desire,
    All the night did rove
      Without dread at all:
    Still unknowne she past                                           45
      In her strange attire;
    Coming at the last
      Within echoes call,--
    You faire woods, quoth shee,
    Honoured may you bee,                                             50
      Harbouring my heart's delight;
    Which encompass here
    My joye and only deare,
      My trustye friend, and comelye knight.
    Sweete, I come unto thee,                                         55
    Sweete, I come to woo thee;
      That thou mayst not angry bee
    For my long delaying;
    For thy curteous staying
      Soone amendes Ile make to thee.                                 60

    Passing thus alone
      Through the silent forest,
    Many a grievous grone
      Sounded in her eares:
    She heard one complayne                                           65
      And lament the sorest,
    Seeming all in payne,
      Shedding deadly teares.
    Farewell, my deare, quoth hee,
    Whom I must never see;                                            70
      For why my life is att an end,
    Through villaines crueltye:
    For thy sweet sake I dye,
      To show I am a faithfull friend.
    Here I lye a bleeding,                                            75
    While my thoughts are feeding
      On the rarest beautye found.
    O hard happ, that may be!
    Little knows my ladye
      My heartes blood lyes on the ground.                            80

    With that a grone he sends
      Which did burst in sunder
    All the tender bands
      Of his gentle heart.
    She, who knewe his voice,                                         85
      At his wordes did wonder;
    All her former joyes
      Did to griefe convert.
    Strait she ran to see,
    Who this man shold bee,                                           90
      That soe like her love did seeme:

    Her lovely lord she found
    Lye slaine upon the ground,
      Smear'd with gore a ghastlye streame.
    Which his lady spying,                                            95
    Shrieking, fainting, crying,
      Her sorrows could not uttered bee:
    Fate, she cryed, too cruell:
    For thee--my dearest jewell,
      Would God! that I had dyed for thee.                           100

    His pale lippes, alas!
      Twentye times she kissed,
    And his face did wash
      With her trickling teares:
    Every gaping wound                                               105
      Tenderlye she pressed,
    And did wipe it round
      With her golden haires.
    Speake, faire love, quoth shee,
    Speake, fair prince, to mee,                                     110
      One sweete word of comfort give:
    Lift up thy deare eyes,
    Listen to my cryes,
      Thinke in what sad griefe I live.
    All in vain she sued,                                            115
    All in vain she wooed,
      The prince's life was fled and gone.
    There stood she still mourning,
    Till the suns retourning,
      And bright day was coming on.                                  120

    In this great distresse
      Weeping, wayling ever,
    Oft shee cryed, alas!
      What will become of mee?
    To my fathers court                                              125
      I returne will never:
    But in lowlye sort
      I will a servant bee.
    While thus she made her mone,
    Weeping all alone,                                               130
      In this deepe and deadlye feare:
    A for'ster all in greene,
    Most comelye to be seene,
      Ranging the woods did find her there.
    Moved with her sorrowe,                                          135
    Maid, quoth hee, good morrowe,
      What hard happ has brought thee here?
    Harder happ did never
    Two kinde hearts dissever:
      Here lyes slaine my brother deare.                             140

    Where may I remaine,
      Gentle for'ster, shew me,
    'Till I can obtaine
      A service in my neede?
    Paines I will not spare:                                         145
      This kinde favour doe me,
    It will ease my care;
      Heaven shall be thy meede.
    The for'ster all amazed,
    On her beautye gazed,                                            150
      Till his heart was set on fire.
    If, faire maid, quoth hee,
    You will goe with mee,
      You shall have your hearts desire.
    He brought her to his mother,                                    155
    And above all other
      He sett forth this maidens praise.
    Long was his heart inflamed,
    At length her love he gained,
      And fortune crown'd his future dayes.                          160

    Thus unknowne he wedde
      With a kings faire daughter;
    Children seven they had,
      'Ere she told her birth.
    Which when once he knew,                                         165
      Humblye he besought her,
    He to the world might shew
      Her rank and princelye worth.
    He cloath'd his children then,
    (Not like other men)                                             170
      In partye-colours strange to see;
    The right side cloth of gold,
    The left side to behold,
      Of woollen cloth still framed hee[386].
    Men thereat did wonder;                                          175
    Golden fame did thunder
      This strange deede in every place:
    The king of France came thither,
    It being pleasant weather,
      In those woods the hart to chase.                              180

    The children then they bring,
      So their mother will'd it,
    Where the royall king
      Must of force come bye:
    Their mothers riche array,                                       185
     Was of crimson velvet:
    Their fathers all of gray,
      Seemelye to the eye.
    Then this famous king,
    Noting every thing,                                              190
      Askt how he durst be so bold
    To let his wife soe weare,
    And decke his children there
      In costly robes of pearl and gold.
    The forrester replying,                                          195
    And the cause descrying[387],
      To the king these words did say,
    Well may they, by their mother,
    Weare rich clothes with other,
      Being by birth a princesse gay.                                200

    The king aroused thus,
      More heedfullye beheld them,
    Till a crimson blush
      His remembrance crost.
    The more I fix my mind                                           205
      On thy wife and children,
    The more methinks I find
      The daughter which I lost.
    Falling on her knee,
    I am that child, quoth shee;                                     210
      Pardon mee, my soveraine liege.
    The king perceiving this,
    His daughter deare did kiss,
      While joyfull teares did stopp his speeche.
    With his traine he tourned,                                      215
    And with them sojourned.
      Strait he dubb'd her husband knight;
    Then made him erle of Flanders,
    And chiefe of his commanders:
      Thus were their sorrowes put to flight.                        220

                                                    [***]

FOOTNOTES:

[386] This will remind the reader of the livery and device of Charles
Brandon, a private gentleman, who married the Queen Dowager of France,
sister of Henry VIII. At a tournament which he held at his wedding, the
trappings of his horse were half Cloth of gold, and half Frieze, with
the following Motto:--

    "Cloth of Gold, do not despise,
    Tho' thou art matcht with Cloth of Frize,
    Cloth of Frize, be not too bold,
    Tho' thou art matcht with Cloth of Gold."

See Sir W. Temple's _Misc._ vol. iii. p. 356.

[387] _i.e._ describing.




XVII.

THE SWEET NEGLECT.


This little madrigal (extracted from Ben. Jonson's _Silent Woman_,
act i. sc. 1, first acted in 1609) is in imitation of a Latin Poem
printed at the end of the Variorum Edit. of Petronius, beginning,
_Semper munditias, semper Basilissa, decoras_, &c. See Whalley's _Ben
Jonson_, vol. ii. p. 420.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Still to be neat, still to be drest,
    As you were going to a feast:
    Still to be pou'dred, still perfum'd:
    Lady, it is to be presum'd,
    Though art's hid causes are not found,                             5
    All is not sweet, all is not sound.

    Give me a looke, give me a face,
    That makes simplicitie a grace;
    Robes loosely flowing, haire as free:
    Such sweet neglect more taketh me,                                10
    Than all th' adulteries of art,
    That strike mine eyes, but not my heart.




XVIII.

THE CHILDREN IN THE WOOD.


The subject of this very popular ballad (which has been set in so
favourable a light by the _Spectator_, No. 85.) seems to be taken
from an old play, intitled, _Two lamentable Tragedies; The one of
the murder of Maister Beech, a chandler in Thames streete, &c. The
other of a young child murthered in a wood by two ruffins, with the_
_consent of his unkle._ By Rob. Yarrington, 1601, 4to. Our ballad-maker
has strictly followed the play in the description of the father and
mother's dying charge: in the uncle's promise to take care of their
issue: his hiring two ruffians to destroy his ward, under pretence of
sending him to school: their chusing a wood to perpetrate the murder
in: one of the ruffians relenting, and a battle ensuing, &c. In other
respects he has departed from the play. In the latter the scene is laid
in Padua: there is but one child: which is murdered by a sudden stab
of the unrelenting ruffian: he is slain himself by his less bloody
companion; but ere he dies gives the other a mortal wound: the latter
living just long enough to impeach the uncle; who, in consequence of
this impeachment, is arraigned and executed by the hand of justice, &c.
Whoever compares the play with the ballad, will have no doubt but the
former is the original: the language is far more obsolete, and such a
vein of simplicity runs through the whole performance, that, had the
ballad been written first, there is no doubt but every circumstance of
it would have been received into the drama: whereas this was probably
built on some Italian novel.

Printed from two ancient copies, one of them in black-letter in the
Pepys Collection. Its title at large is, _The Children in the Wood;
or, The Norfolk Gentleman's Last Will and Testament: To the tune of
Rogero, &c._

       *       *       *       *       *

  [Ritson thought he had refuted Percy's statement that the play was
  older than the ballad by pointing out that the latter was entered
  in the Stationers' books in 1595, but I find in Baker's _Biographia
  Dramatica_ an assertion that Yarrington's play was not printed
  "till many years after it was written." The following is the form
  of the entry at Stationers' Hall, "15 Oct. 1595. Thomas Millington
  entred for his copie under th[e h]andes of bothe the Wardens
  a ballad intituled _The Norfolk Gent, his Will and Testament_
  _and howe he commytted the keepinge of his children to his owne_
  _brother whoe delte most wickedly with them and howe God plagued_
  _him for it._" Sharon Turner and Miss Halsted favoured the rather
  untenable opinion that the wicked uncle was intended to represent
  Richard III., and therefore that the date of the ballad was much
  earlier than that usually claimed for it. Turner writes in his
  _History of England_, "I have sometimes fancied that the popular
  ballad may have been written at this time on Richard and his
  nephews before it was quite safe to stigmatize him more openly."

  Wailing, or Wayland Wood, a large cover near Walton in Norfolk is
  the place which tradition assigns to the tragedy, but the people of
  Wood Dalling also claim the honour for their village.

  Addison speaks of the ballad as "one of the darling songs of the
  common people, [which] has been the delight of most Englishmen in
  some part of their age," and points out that the circumstance

    ... robin-red-breast piously
    Did cover them with leaves,

  has a parallel in Horace, who tells us that when he was a child,
  fallen asleep in a desert wood, the turtle doves took pity on him
  and covered him with leaves.

  The popular belief that the robin covers dead bodies with leaves
  (probably founded on the habits of the bird) is of considerable
  antiquity. The passage in Cymbeline (act iv. sc. 2) naturally
  occurs as the chief illustration:--

    ... "the ruddock would,
    With charitable bill....
    ... bring thee all this,
    Yea and furr'd moss besides, when flowers are none,
    To winter-ground thy corse."

  In Webster's _White Devil_, act v., we read:--

    "Call for the robin red breast and the wren
    Since o'er shady groves they hover
    And with leaves and flowers do cover
    The friendless bodies of unburied men."

  The critics suppose Webster to have imitated Shakespere here, but
  there is no ground for any such supposition. The industry of Reed,
  Steevens, and Douce has supplied us with several passages from old
  literature in which this characteristic of the robin is referred to.

  In "_Cornucopiæ, or, divers Secrets_; wherein is contained the rare
  secrets of man, beasts, fowles, fishes, trees, plants, stones, and
  such like, most pleasant and profitable, and not before committed
  to bee printed in English. Newlie drawen out of divers Latine
  Authors into English by Thomas Johnson," 4to. London, 1596, occurs
  the following passage:--"The robin red-breast if he find a man or
  woman dead will cover all his face with mosse, and some thinke that
  if the body should remaine unburied that hee woulde cover the whole
  body also."

  This little secret of Johnson is copied by Thomas Lupton into his
  _A Thousand Notable Things of sundrie sorts newly corrected_, 1601,
  where it appears as No. 37 of book i.

  Michael Drayton has the following lines in his poem, _The Owl_:

    "Cov'ring with moss the dead's unclosed eye
    The little red-breast teacheth charitie."

  In Dekker's _Villanies discovered by lanthorn and candlelight_,
  1616, we read, "They that cheere up a prisoner but with their sight
  are Robin red-breasts, that bring strawes in their bils to cover
  a dead man in extremitìe." This is sufficient evidence that the
  belief was wide-spread.]

       *       *       *       *       *

    Now ponder well, you parents deare,
      These wordes, which I shall write;
    A doleful story you shall heare,
      In time brought forth to light.
    A gentleman of good account                                        5
      In Norfolke dwelt of late,
    Who did in honour far surmount
      Most men of his estate.

    Sore sicke he was, and like to dye,
      No helpe his life could save;                                   10
    His wife by him as sicke did lye,
      And both possest one grave.
    No love between these two was lost,
      Each was to other kinde,
    In love they liv'd, in love they dyed,                            15
      And left two babes behinde:

    The one a fine and pretty boy,
      Not passing three yeares olde;
    The other a girl more young than he,
      And fram'd in beautyes molde.                                   20
    The father left his little son,
      As plainlye doth appeare,
    When he to perfect age should come,
      Three hundred poundes a yeare.

    And to his little daughter Jane                                   25
      Five hundred poundes in gold,
    To be paid down on marriage-day,
      Which might not be controll'd:

    But if the children chance to dye,
      Ere they to age should come,                                    30
    Their uncle should possesse their wealth;
      For so the wille did run.

    Now, brother, said the dying man,
      Look to my children deare;
    Be good unto my boy and girl,                                     35
      No friendes else have they here:
    To God and you I recommend
      My children deare this daye;
    But little while be sure we have
      Within this world to staye.                                     40

    You must be father and mother both,
      And uncle all in one;
    God knowes what will become of them,
      When I am dead and gone.
    With that bespake their mother deare,                             45
      O brother kinde, quoth shee,
    You are the man must bring our babes
      To wealth or miserie:

    And if you keep them carefully,
      Then God will you reward;                                       50
    But if you otherwise should deal,
      God will your deedes regard.
    With lippes as cold as any stone,
      They kist their children small:
    God bless you both, my children deare;                            55
      With that the teares did fall.

    These speeches then their brother spake
      To this sicke couple there,
    The keeping of your little ones
      Sweet sister, do not feare;                                     60
    God never prosper me nor mine,
      Nor aught else that I have,
    If I do wrong your children deare,
      When you are layd in grave.

    The parents being dead and gone,                                  65
      The children home he takes,
    And bringes them straite unto his house,
      Where much of them he makes.
    He had not kept these pretty babes
      A twelvemonth and a daye,                                       70
    But, for their wealth, he did devise
      To make them both awaye.

    He bargain'd with two ruffians strong,
      Which were of furious mood,
    That they should take these children young,                       75
      And slaye them in a wood.
    He told his wife an artful tale,
      He would the children send
    To be brought up in faire Londòn,
      With one that was his friend.                                   80

    Away then went those pretty babes,
      Rejoycing at that tide,
    Rejoycing with a merry minde,
      They should on cock-horse ride.
    They prate and prattle pleasantly,                                85
      As they rode on the waye,
    To those that should their butchers be,
      And work their lives decaye:

    So that the pretty speeche they had,
      Made Murder's heart relent;                                     90
    And they that undertooke the deed,
      Full sore did now repent.
    Yet one of them more hard of heart,
      Did vowe to do his charge,
    Because the wretch, that hired him,                               95
      Had paid him very large.

    The other won't agree thereto,
      So here they fall to strife;
    With one another they did fight,
      About the childrens life:                                      100

    And he that was of mildest mood,
      Did slaye the other there,
    Within an unfrequented wood;
      The babes did quake for feare!

    He took the children by the hand,                                105
      Teares standing in their eye,
    And bad them straitwaye follow him,
      And look they did not crye:
    And two long miles he ledd them on,
      While they for food complaine:                                 110
    Staye here, quoth he, I'll bring you bread,
      When I come back againe.

    These pretty babes, with hand in hand,
      Went wandering up and downe;
    But never more could see the man                                 115
      Approaching from the town:
    Their prettye lippes with black-berries,
      Were all besmear'd and dyed,
    And when they sawe the darksome night,
      They sat them downe and cryed.                                 120

    Thus wandered these poor innocents,
      Till deathe did end their grief,
    In one anothers armes they dyed,
      As wanting due relief:
    No burial 'this' pretty 'pair'[388]                              125
      Of any man receives,
    Till Robin-red-breast piously
      Did cover them with leaves.

    And now the heavy wrathe of God
      Upon their uncle fell;                                         130
    Yea, fearfull fiends did haunt his house,
      His conscience felt an hell:
    His barnes were fir'd, his goodes consum'd,
      His landes were barren made,
    His cattle dyed within the field,                                135
      And nothing with him stayd.

    And in a voyage to Portugal[389]
      Two of his sonnes did dye;
    And to conclude, himselfe was brought
      To want and miserye:                                           140
    He pawn'd and mortgaged all his land
      Ere seven yeares came about.
    And now at length this wicked act
      Did by this meanes come out:

    The fellowe, that did take in hand                               145
      These children for to kill,
    Was for a robbery judg'd to dye,
      Such was God's blessed will:
    Who did confess the very truth,
      As here hath been display'd:                                   150
    Their uncle having dyed in gaol,
      Where he for debt was layd.

    You that executors be made,
      And overseers eke
    Of children that be fatherless,                                  155
      And infants mild and meek;
    Take you example by this thing,
      And yield to each his right,
    Lest God with such like miserye
      Your wicked minds requite.                                     160

FOOTNOTES:

[388] Ver. 125. these ... babes. _P.P._

[389] [Ritson has the following note (_Ancient Songs_, 1829, vol. ii.
P. 155): "_the_ voyage, A.D. 1588. See the Catalogue of the Harl.
MSS. No. 167 (15). Dr. Percy, not knowing that the text alludes to a
particular event, has altered it to _a_ voyage."]




XIX.

A LOVER OF LATE.


Printed, with a few slight corrections, from the Editor's folio MS.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [This song is printed, Hales and Furnivall's edition of the MS.
  vol. iii. p. 389.]

       *       *       *       *       *

        A lover of late was I,
          For Cupid would have it soe,
        The boy that hath never an eye,
          As every man doth know:
    I sighed and sobbed, and cryed, alas!                              5
    For her that laught, and called me ass.

        Then knew not I what to doe,
          When I saw itt was in vaine[390]
        A lady soe coy to wooe,
          Who gave me the asse soe plaine:[391]                       10
    Yet would I her asse freelye bee,
    Soe shee would helpe, and beare with mee.

        An' I were as faire as shee,[392]
          Or shee were as kind as I,[393]
        What payre cold have made, as wee,                            15
          Soe prettye a sympathye:
    I was as kind as she was faire,
    But for all this wee cold not paire.

      Paire with her that will for mee,
        With her I will never paire;                                  20
      That cunningly can be coy,
        For being a little faire.
    The asse Ile leave to her disdaine;
    And now I am myselfe againe.

FOOTNOTES:

[390] [Ver. 8. when I see itt was vaine.]

[391] [V. 10. and gave.]

[392] [V. 13. faine, MS.]

[393] [V. 14. and shee, MS.]




XX.

THE KING AND MILLER OF MANSFIELD.


It has been a favourite subject with our English ballad-makers to
represent our kings conversing, either by accident or design, with
the meanest of their subjects. Of the former kind, besides this song
of the King and the Miller; we have K. Henry and the Soldier; K.
James I. and the Tinker; K. William III. and the Forrester &c. Of the
latter sort, are K. Alfred and the Shepherd; K. Edward IV. and the
Tanner;[394] K. Henry VIII. and the Cobler, &c.--A few of the best
of these are admitted into this collection. Both the author of the
following ballad, and others who have written on the same plan, seem
to have copied a very ancient poem, intitled _John the Reeve_, which
is built on an adventure of the same kind, that happened between K.
Edward Longshanks, and one of his Reeves or Bailiffs. This is a piece
of great antiquity, being written before the time of Edward IV. and for
its genuine humour, diverting incidents, and faithful picture of rustic
manners, is infinitely superior to all that have been since written in
imitation of it. The Editor has a copy in his ancient folio MS. but its
length rendered it improper for this volume, it consisting of more than
900 lines. It contains also some corruptions, and the Editor chuses to
defer its publication in hopes that some time or other he shall be able
to remove them.

The following is printed, with corrections, from the editor's folio
MS. collated with an old black-letter copy in the Pepys Collection,
intitled _A pleasant ballad of K. Henry II. and the Miller of
Mansfield, &c._

       *       *       *       *       *

  [This ballad of _Henry II. and the Miller of Mansfield_ cannot
  be traced farther back than the end of Elizabeth's reign or the
  beginning of James's. One of the three copies in the Roxburghe
  Collection is dated by Mr. Chappell between 1621 and 1655, and the
  copy in the Folio MS. (ed. Hales and Furnivall, vol. ii. p. 147)
  was written about the same period. (See Roxburghe _Ballads_, ed.
  Chappell, vol. i. p. 538.)

  As there are earlier copies than the one in the Folio MS. it has
  not been thought necessary to add Collations.

  _John the Reeve_, referred to above, is one of the earliest and
  most interesting of this large class of tales. It was printed for
  the first time in Hales and Furnivall's edition of the MS. (vol.
  ii. p. 550) with a valuable introduction.

  This spirited poem was probably written originally in the middle of
  the fifteenth century. "It professes to describe an incident that
  took place in the days of King Edward. It adds:

    Of that name were Kings _three_
    But Edward with the long shanks was he,
          A lord of great renown.

  The poem then was written after the death of Edward III.; that is,
  after 1377, and before the accession of Edward IV., that is before
  1461."]

       *       *       *       *       *


                            PART THE FIRST.

    Henry, our royall king, would ride a hunting
      To the greene forest so pleasant and faire;
    To see the harts skipping, and dainty does tripping:
      Unto merry Sherwood his nobles repaire:
    Hawke and hound were unbound, all things prepar'd                  5
    For the game, in the same, with good regard.

    All a long summers day rode the king pleasantlye,
      With all his princes and nobles eche one;

    Chasing the hart and hind, and the bucke gallantlye,
      Till the dark evening forc'd all to turne home.                 10
    Then at last, riding fast, he had lost quite
    All his lords in the wood, late in the night.

    Wandering thus wearilye, all alone, up and downe,
      With a rude miller he mett at the last:
    Asking the ready way unto faire Nottingham;                       15
      Sir, quoth the miller, I meane not to jest,
    Yet I thinke, what I thinke, sooth for to say,
    You doe not lightlye ride out of your way.

    Why, what dost thou think of me, quoth our king merrily,
      Passing thy judgment upon me so briefe?                         20
    Good faith, sayd the miller, I meane not to flatter thee;
      I guess thee to be but some gentleman thiefe;
    Stand thee backe, in the darke; light not adowne,
    Lest that I presentlye cracke thy knaves crowne.

    Thou dost abuse me much, quoth the king, saying thus;             25
      I am a gentleman; lodging I lacke.
    Thou hast not, quoth th' miller, one groat in thy purse;
      All thy inheritance hanges on thy backe.[395]
    I have gold to discharge all that I call;
    If it be forty pence, I will pay all.                             30

    If thou beest a true man, then quoth the miller,
      I sweare by my toll-dish, I'll lodge thee all night.
    Here's my hand, quoth the king, that was I ever.
      Nay, soft, quoth the miller, thou may'st be a sprite.
    Better I'll know thee, ere hands we will shake;                   35
    With none but honest men hands will I take.

    Thus they went all along unto the miller's house;
      Where they were seething of puddings and souse:[396]
    The miller first enter'd in, after him went the king;
      Never came hee in soe smoakye a house.                          40
    Now, quoth hee, let me see here what you are.
    Quoth our king, looke your fill, and doe not spare.

    I like well thy countenance, thou hast an honest face
      With my son Richard this night thou shalt lye.
    Quoth his wife, by my troth, it is a handsome youth,              45
      Yet it's best, husband, to deal warilye.
    Art thou no run away, prythee, youth, tell?
    Shew me thy passport, and all shal be well.

    Then our king presentlye, making lowe courtesye,
      With his hatt in his hand, thus he did say;                     50
    I have no passport, nor never was servitor,
      But a poor courtyer, rode out of my way:
    And for your kindness here offered to mee,
    I will requite you in everye degree.

    Then to the miller his wife whisper'd secretlye,                  55
      Saying, It seemeth, this youth's of good kin,
    Both by his apparel, and eke by his manners;
      To turne him out, certainlye, were a great sin.
    Yea, quoth hee, you may see, he hath some grace
    When he doth speake to his betters in place.                      60

    Well, quo' the millers wife, young man, ye're welcome here;
      And, though I say it, well lodged shall be:
    Fresh straw will I have, laid on thy bed so brave,
      And good brown hempen sheets likewise, quoth shee.
    Aye, quoth the good man; and when that is done,                   65
    Thou shalt lye with no worse, than our own sonne.

    Nay, first, quoth Richard, good-fellowe, tell me true,
      Host thou noe creepers within thy gay hose?
    Or art thou not troubled with the scabbado?
      I pray, quoth the king, what creatures are those?               70
    Art thou not lowsy, nor scabby? quoth he:
    If thou beest, surely thou lyest not with mee.

    This caus'd the king, suddenlye, to laugh most heartilye,
      Till the teares trickled fast downe from his eyes.
    Then to their supper were they set orderlye,                      75
      With hot bag-puddings, and good apple-pyes;
    Nappy ale, good and stale, in a browne bowle,
    Which did about the board merrilye trowle.

    Here, quoth the miller, good fellowe, I drinke to thee,
      And to all 'cuckholds, wherever they bee.'[397]                 80
    I pledge thee, quotth our king, and thanke thee heartilye
      For my good welcome in everye degree:
    And here, in like manner, I drinke to thy sonne.
    Do then, quoth Richard, and quicke let it come.

    Wife, quoth the miller, fetch me forth lightfoote,                85
      And of his sweetnesse a little we'll taste.
    A fair ven'son pastye brought she out presentlye.
      Eate, quoth the miller, but, sir, make no waste.
    Here's dainty lightfoote! In faith, sayd the king,
    I never before eat so daintye a thing.                            90

    I wis, quoth Richard, no daintye at all it is,
      For we doe eate of it everye day.
    In what place, sayd our king, may be bought like to this?
      We never pay pennye for itt, by my fay;
    From merry Sherwood we fetch it home here;                        95
    Now and then we make bold with our kings deer.

    Then I thinke, sayd our king, that it is venison.
      Eche foole, quoth Richard, full well may know that:
    Never are wee without two or three in the roof,
      Very well fleshed, and excellent fat:                          100
    But, prythee, say nothing wherever thou goe;
    We would not, for two pence, the king should it knowe.

    Doubt not, then sayd the king, my promist secresye;
      The king shall never know more on't for mee.
    A cupp of lambs-wool[398] they dranke unto him then,             105
      And to their bedds they past presentlie.
    The nobles, next morning, went all up and down,
    For to seeke out the king in everye towne.

    At last, at the miller's 'cott,' soone they espy'd him out,
      As he was mounting upon his faire steede;                      110
    To whom they came presently, falling down on their knee;
      Which made the millers heart wofully bleede;
    Shaking and quaking, before him he stood,
    Thinking he should have been hang'd, by the rood.

    The king perceiving him fearfully trembling,                     115
      Drew forth his sword, but nothing he sed:
    The miller downe did fall, crying before them all,
      Doubting the king would have cut off his head.
    But he his kind courtesye for to requite,
    Gave him great living, and dubb'd him a knight.                  120

       *       *       *       *       *


                           PART THE SECONDE.

    When as our royall king came home from Nottingham,
      And with his nobles at Westminster lay;
    Recounting the sports and pastimes they had taken,
      In this late progress along on the way;
    Of them all, great and small, he did protest,                      5
    The miller of Mansfield's sport liked him best.

    And now, my lords, quoth the king, I am determined
      Against St. Georges next sumptuous feast,
    That this old miller, our new confirm'd knight,
      With his son Richard, shall here be my guest:                   10
    For, in this merryment, 'tis my desire
    To talke with the jolly knight, and the young squire.

    When as the noble lords saw the kinges pleasantness,
      They were right joyfull and glad in their hearts:
    A pursuivant there was sent straighte on the business,            15
      The which had often-times been in those parts.
    When he came to the place, where they did dwell,
    His message orderlye then 'gan he tell.

    God save your worshippe, then said the messenger,
      And grant your ladye her own hearts desire;                     20
    And to your sonne Richard good fortune and happiness;
      That sweet, gentle, and gallant young squire.
    Our king greets you well, and thus he doth say,
    You must come to the court on St. George's day;

    Therfore, in any case, faile not to be in place.                  25
      I wis, quoth the miller, this is an odd jest:
    What should we doe there? faith, I am halfe afraid.
      I doubt, quoth Richard, to be hang'd at the least.
    Nay, quoth the messenger, you doe mistake;
    Our king he provides a great feast for your sake.                 30

    Then sayd the miller, By my troth, messenger,
      Thou hast contented my worshippe full well.
    Hold here are three farthings, to quite thy gentleness,
      For these happy tydings, which thou dost tell.
    Let me see, hear thou mee; tell to our king,                      35
    We'll wayt on his mastershipp in everye thing.

    The pursuivant smiled at their simplicitye,
      And, making many leggs, tooke their reward;
    And his leave taking with great humilitye
      To the kings court againe he repair'd;                          40
    Shewing unto his grace, merry and free,
    The knightes most liberall gift and bountie.

    When he was gone away, thus gan the miller say,
      Here come expences and charges indeed;
    Now must we needs be brave, tho' we spend all we have;            45
       For of new garments we have great need:
    Of horses and serving-men we must have store,
    With bridles and saddles, and twentye things more.

    Tushe, sir John, quoth his wife, why should you frett, or frowne?
      You shall ne'er be att no charges for mee;                      50
    For I will turne and trim up my old russet gowne,
      With everye thing else as fine as may bee;
    And on our mill-horses swift we will ride,
    With pillowes and pannells, as we shall provide.

    In this most statelye sort, rode they unto the court,             55
      Their jolly sonne Richard rode foremost of all;

    Who set up, for good hap, a cocks feather in his cap,[399]
      And so they jetted[400] downe to the kings hall;
    The merry old miller with hands on his side;
    His wife, like maid Marian, did mince at that tide.[401]          60

    The king and his nobles that heard of their coming,
      Meeting this gallant knight with his brave traine;
    Welcome, sir knight, quoth he, with your gay lady:
      Good sir John Cockle, once welcome againe:
    And soe is the squire of courage soe free.                        65
    Quoth Dicke, A bots on you! do you know mee?

    Quoth our king gentlye, how should I forget thee?
      That wast my owne bed-fellowe, well it I wot.
    Yea, sir, quoth Richard, and by the same token,
      Thou with thy farting didst make the bed hot.                   70
    Thou whore-son unhappy knave, then quoth the knight,
    Speake cleanly to our king, or else go sh***.

    The king and his courtiers laugh at this heartily,
      While the king taketh them both by the hand;
    With the court-dames, and maids, like to the queen of spades      75
      The millers wife did soe orderlye stand.
    A milk-maids courtesye at every word;
    And downe all the folkes were set to the board.

    There the king royally, in princelye majestye,
      Sate at his dinner with joy and delight;                        80
    When they had eaten well, then he to jesting fell,
      And in a bowle of wine dranke to the knight:
    Here's to you both, in wine, ale and beer;
    Thanking you heartilye for my good cheer.

    Quoth sir John Cockle, I'll pledge you a pottle,                  85
      Were it the best ale in Nottinghamshire:
    But then said our king, now I think of a thing;
      Some of your lightfoote I would we had here.
    Ho! ho! quoth Richard, full well I may say it,
    'Tis knavery to eate it, and then to betray it.                   90

    Why art thou angry? quoth our king merrilye;
      In faith, I take it now very unkind:
    I thought thou wouldst pledge me in ale and wine heartily.
      Quoth Dicke, You are like to stay till I have din'd:
    You feed us with twatling dishes soe small;                       95
    Zounds, a blacke-pudding is better than all.

    Aye, marry, quoth our king, that were a daintye thing,
      Could a man get but one here for to eate.
    With that Dicke straite arose, and pluckt one from his hose,
      Which with heat of his breech gan to sweate.                   100
    The king made a proffer to snatch it away:--
    'Tis meat for your master: good sir, you must stay.

    Thus in great merriment was the time wholly spent;
      And then the ladyes prepared to dance.
    Old Sir John Cockle, and Richard, incontinent[402]               105
      Unto their places the king did advance.
    Here with the ladyes such sport they did make,
    The nobles with laughing did make their sides ake.

    Many thankes for their paines did the king give them,
      Asking young Richard then, if he would wed;                    110
    Among these ladyes free, tell me which liketh thee?
      Quoth he, Jugg Grumball, Sir, with the red head:
    She's my love, she's my life, her will I wed;
    She hath sworn I shall have her maidenhead.

    Then sir John Cockle the king called unto him,                   115
      And of merry Sherwood made him o'er seer;
    And gave him out of hand three hundred pound yearlye:
      Take heed now you steale no more of my deer:
    And once a quarter let's here have your view;
    And now, sir John Cockle, I bid you adieu.                       120

FOOTNOTES:

[394] [See vol. ii. book i. No. 15.]

[395] The king says this.

[396] [The head, feet, and ears of swine boiled and pickled for
eating.--_Halliwell's Dictionary._]

[397] [Ver. 80. courtnalls, that courteous be. _MS. and P._]

[398] [A favourite liquor among the common people, composed of ale and
roasted apples, the pulp of the apple worked up with the ale till the
mixture formed a smooth beverage. _Nares' Glossary._]

[399] [Ver. 57. _for good hap_: _i.e._ for good luck; they were going
on an hazardous expedition.]

[400] [strutted.]

[401] [Ver. 60. Maid Marian in the Morris dance, was represented by a
man in woman's cloaths, who was to take short steps in order to sustain
the female character.]

[402] [forthwith.]




XXI.

THE SHEPHERD'S RESOLUTION.


This beautiful old song was written by a poet, whose name would have
been utterly forgotten, if it had not been preserved by _Swift_, as a
term of contempt. _Dryden_ and _Wither_ are coupled by him like the
_Bavius_ and _Mævius_ of Virgil. _Dryden_, however, has had justice
done him by posterity: and as for _Wither_, though of subordinate
merit, that he was not altogether devoid of genius, will be judged from
the following stanzas. The truth is, _Wither_ was a very voluminous
party-writer: and as his political and satyrical strokes rendered him
extremely popular in his life-time; so afterwards, when these were no
longer relished, they totally consigned his writings to oblivion.

_George Wither_ was born June 11, 1588, and in his younger years
distinguished himself by some pastoral pieces, that were not inelegant;
but growing afterwards involved in the political and religious disputes
in the times of James I. and Charles I. he employed his poetical vein
in severe pasquils on the court and clergy, and was occasionally a
sufferer for the freedom of his pen. In the civil war that ensued,
he exerted himself in the service of the Parliament, and became a
considerable sharer in the spoils. He was even one of those provincial
tyrants, whom Oliver distributed over the kingdom, under the name
of Major Generals; and had the fleecing of the county of Surrey:
but surviving the Restoration, he outlived both his power and his
affluence; and giving vent to his chagrin in libels on the court, was
long a prisoner in Newgate and the Tower. He died at length on the 2d
of May, 1667.

During the whole course of his life, _Wither_ was a continual
publisher; having generally for opponent, _Taylor_ the Water-poet.
The long list of his productions may be seen in Wood's _Athenæ._
_Oxon._ vol. ii. His most popular satire is intitled, _Abuses whipt_
_and stript_, 1613. His most poetical pieces were eclogues, intitled,
_The Shepherd's Hunting_, 1615, 8vo. and others printed at the end
of Browne's _Shepherd's Pipe_, 1614, 8vo. The following sonnet is
extracted from a long pastoral piece of his, intitled, _The Mistresse_
_of Philarete_, 1622, 8vo. which is said in the preface to be one of
the Author's first poems; and may therefore be dated as early as any of
the foregoing.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [This favourite song appeared in 1619, appended to Wither's
  _Fidelia_, and again in his _Juvenilia_ in 1633 in _Fair Virtue
  the mistress of Philarete_. It was reprinted again and again, and
  occurs in the Folio MS. (ed. Hales and Furnivall, vol. ii. p. 50).

  Mr. Chappell refers to a copy in the Pepys Collection entitled, _A
  New Song of a young man's opinion of the difference between good_
  _and bad women_, the first line of which is, "Shall I _wrestling_
  in despaire?" This reading seems to have been pretty popular, as
  Mr. Chappell gives two instances of the tune being called "_Shall_
  _I wrastle in despair?_" Mr. Chappell prints a song in the same
  metre and with a similar burden, which has been attributed on
  insufficient evidence to Sir Walter Raleigh. The first stanza is as
  follows:--

    "Shall I like a hermit dwell
    On a rock or in a cell?
    Calling home the smallest part
    That is missing of my heart,
    To bestow it where I may
    Meet a rival every day?
    If she undervalues me
    What care I how fair she be."

  _Popular Music of the Olden Time_, vol. i. p. 315.]

       *       *       *       *       *

    Shall I, wasting in dispaire,
    Dye because a woman's faire?
    Or make pale my cheeks with care,
    'Cause another's rosie are?
    Be shee fairer then the day,                                       5
    Or the flowery meads in may;
      If she be not so to me,[403]
      What care I how faire shee be?

    Shall my foolish heart be pin'd,
    'Cause I see a woman kind?                                        10
    Or a well-disposed nature
    Joyned with a lovely feature?
    Be she meeker, kinder, than
    The turtle-dove or pelican:
      If shee be not so to me,                                        15
      What care I how kind shee be?

    Shall a woman's virtues move
    Me to perish for her love?
    Or, her well-deservings knowne,
    Make me quite forget mine owne?                                   20
    Be shee with that goodnesse blest,
    Which may merit name of Best;
      If she be not such to me,[404]
      What care I how good she be?

    Cause her fortune seems too high,[405]                            25
    Shall I play the foole and dye?[405]
    Those that beare a noble minde,[405]
    Where they want of riches find,[405]
    Think what with them they would doe,[405]
    That without them dare to woe;[405]                               30
      And, unlesse that minde I see,[405]
      What care I how great she be?[405]

    Great or good, or kind or faire,
    I will ne'er the more dispaire:
    If she love me, this beleeve;                                     35
    I will die ere she shall grieve.
    If she slight me when I wooe,
    I can scorn and let her goe:
      If shee be not fit for me,
      What care I for whom she be?                                    40

FOOTNOTES:

[403] [Ver. 7. if shee thinke not well of mee, MS.]

[404] [V. 23. soe to me, MS.]

[405] [V. 25-32. this stanza is not in the MS.]




XXII.

QUEEN DIDO.


Such is the title given in the editor's folio MS.[406] to this
excellent old ballad, which, in the common printed copies, is
inscribed, _Eneas, wandering Prince of Troy_. It is here given
from that MS. collated with two different printed copies, both in
black-letter, in the Pepys Collection.

The reader will smile to observe with what natural and affecting
simplicity, our ancient ballad-maker has engrafted a Gothic conclusion
on the classic story of Virgil, from whom, however, it is probable he
had it not. Nor can it be denied, but he has dealt out his poetical
justice with a more impartial hand, than that celebrated poet.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [This once popular ballad was entered on the Registers of the
  Stationers Company in 1564-5 as "a ballett intituled _The
  Wanderynge Prince_." Its great popularity is evidenced by the
  frequent references in literature and the large number of ballads
  sung to the tune of _Queen Dido_ or _Troy towne_. In _The Penniless
  Parliament of Threadbare Poets_, 1608, ale-knights are said
  to "sing _Queen Dido_ over a cup and tell strange news over an
  ale-pot," and the same song is referred to in Fletcher's _Captain_
  (act iii. sc. 3) and his _Bonduca_, act i. sc. 2.

  The only tune that Mr. Chappell could find for the ballad was one
  by Dr. John Wilson (the Jack Wilson of Shakspere's stage according
  to Dr. Rimbault), which is printed in his _Cheerful Ayres or
  Ballads_, Oxford, 1660.]

       *       *       *       *       *

      When Troy towne had, for ten yeeres "past,"[407]
        Withstood the Greekes in manfull wise,
      Then did their foes encrease soe fast,
        That to resist none could suffice:
    Wast lye those walls, that were soe good,                          5
    And corne now growes where Troy towne stoode.

      Æneas, wandering prince of Troy,
        When he for land long time had sought,
      At length arriving with great joy,
        To mighty Carthage walls was brought;                         10
    Where Dido queene, with sumptuous feast,
    Did entertaine that wandering guest.

      And, as in hall at meate, they sate,
        The queene, desirous newes to heare,
      "Says, of thy Troys unhappy fate"                               15
        Declare to me thou Trojan deare:
    The heavy hap and chance soe bad,
    That thou, poore wandering prince, hast had,

      And then anon this comelye knight,
        With words demure, as he cold well,                           20
      Of his unhappy ten yeares "fight,"
        Soe true a tale began to tell,
    With words soe sweete, and sighes so deepe,
    That oft he made them all to weepe.

      And then a thousand sighes he fet,[408]                         25
        And every sigh brought teares amaine;
      That where he sate the place was wett,
        As though he had seene those warrs againe;
    Soe that the queene, with ruth therfore,
    Said, worthy prince, enough, no more.                             30

      And then the darksome night drew on,
        And twinkling starres the skye bespred;
      When he his dolefull tale had done,
        And every one was layd in bedd:
    Where they full sweetly tooke their rest,                         35
    Save only Dido's boyling brest.

      This silly woman never slept,
        But in her chamber, all alone,
      As one unhappye, alwayes wept,
        And to the walls shee made her mone;                          40
    That she shold still desire in vaine
    The thing, she never must obtaine.

      And thus in grieffe she spent the night,
        Till twinkling starres the skye were fled,
      And Ph[oe]bus, with his glistering light,                       45
        Through misty cloudes appeared red;
    Then tidings came to her anon,
    That all the Trojan shipps were gone.

      And then the queene with bloody knife
        Did arme her hart as hard as stone,                           50
      Yet, something loth to loose her life,
        In woefull wise she made her mone;
    And, rowling on her carefull bed,
    With sighes and sobbs, these words shee sayd:

      O wretched Dido queene! quoth shee,                             55
        I see thy end approacheth neare;
      For hee is fled away from thee,
        Whom thou didst love and hold so deare:
    What is he gone, and passed by?
    O hart, prepare thyselfe to dye.                                  60

      Though reason says, thou shouldst forbeare,
        And stay thy hand from bloudy stroke;
      Yet fancy bids thee not to fear,
        Which fetter'd thee in Cupids yoke.
    Come death, quoth shee, resolve my smart!--                       65
    And with those words shee peerced her hart.

      When death had pierced the tender hart
        Of Dido, Carthaginian queene;
      Whose bloudy knife did end the smart,
        Which shee sustain'd in mournfull teene[409];                 70
    Æneas being shipt and gone,
    Whose flattery caused all her mone;

      Her funerall most costly made,
        And all things finisht mournfullye;
      Her body fine in mold was laid,                                 75
        Where itt consumed speedilye:
    Her sisters teares her tombe bestrewde;
    Her subjects griefe their kindnesse shewed.

      Then was Æneas in an ile
        In Grecya, where he stayd long space,                         80
      Wheras her sister in short while
        Writt to him to his vile disgrace;
    In speeches bitter to his mind
    Shee told him plaine he was unkind.

      False-harted wretch, quoth shee, thou art;                      85
        And traiterouslye thou hast betraid
      Unto thy lure a gentle hart,
        Which unto thee much welcome made;
    My sister deare, and Carthage' joy,
    Whose folly bred her deere annoy.                                 90

      Yett on her death-bed when shee lay,
        Shee prayd for thy prosperitye,
      Beseeching god, that every day
        Might breed thy great felicitye:
    Thus by thy meanes I lost a friend;                               95
    Heavens send thee such untimely end.

      When he these lines, full fraught with gall,
        Perused had, and wayed them right,
      His lofty courage then did fall;
        And straight appeared in his sight                           100
    Queene Dido's ghost, both grim and pale;
    Which made this valliant souldier quaile.

      Æneas, quoth this ghastly ghost,
        My whole delight when I did live,
      Thee of all men I loved most;                                  105
        My fancy and my will did give;
    For entertainment I thee gave,
    Unthankefully thou didst me grave.

      Therfore prepare thy flitting soule
        To wander with me in the aire;                               110
      Where deadlye griefe shall make it howle,
        Because of me thou tookst no care:
    Delay not time, thy glasse is run,
    Thy date is past, thy life is done.

      O stay a while, thou lovely sprite,                            115
        Be not soe hasty to convay
      My soule into eternall night,
        Where itt shall ne're behold bright day.
    O doe not frowne; thy angry looke,
    Hath "all my soule with horror shooke."[410]                     120

      But, woe is me! all is in vaine,
        And bootless is my dismall crye;
      Time will not be recalled againe,
        Nor thou surcease before I dye.
    O lett me live, and make amends                                  125
    To some of thy most deerest friends.

      But seeing thou obdurate art,
        And wilt no pittye on me show,
      Because from thee I did depart,
        And left unpaid what I did owe:                              130
    I must content myselfe to take
    What lott to me thou wilt partake.

      And thus, as one being in a trance,
        A multitude of uglye feinds
      About this woffull prince did dance;                           135
        He had no helpe of any friends:
    His body then they tooke away,
    And no man knew his dying day.

FOOTNOTES:

[406] [Ed. Hales and Furnivall, vol. iii. p. 502.]

[407] [Ver. 1. 21. war. MS. and PP.]

[408] fetched.

[409] [trouble.]

[410] Ver. 120. MS. _Hath_ made my breath my life forsooke.




XXIII.

THE WITCHES' SONG


From Ben Jonson's _Masque of Queens_ presented at Whitehall, Feb. 2,
1609.

The editor thought it incumbent on him to insert some old pieces on
the popular superstition concerning witches, hobgoblins, fairies, and
ghosts. The last of these make their appearance in most of the tragical
ballads; and in the following songs will be found some description of
the former.

It is true, this song of the Witches, falling from the learned pen
of Ben Jonson, is rather an extract from the various incantations of
classical antiquity, than a display of the opinions of our own vulgar.
But let it be observed, that a parcel of learned wiseacres had just
before busied themselves on this subject, in compliment to K. James I.
whose weakness on this head is well known: and these had so ransacked
all writers, ancient and modern, and so blended and kneaded together
the several superstitions of different times and nations, that those of
genuine English growth could no longer be traced out and distinguished.

By good luck the whimsical belief of fairies and goblins could furnish
no pretences for torturing our fellow-creatures, and therefore we have
this handed down to us pure and unsophisticated.

       *       *       *       *       *

                             1 WITCH.[411]

    I have been all day looking after
    A raven feeding upon a quarter;
    And, soone as she turn'd her beak to the south,
    I snatch'd this morsell out of her mouth.

                                2 WITCH.

    I have beene gathering wolves haires,                              5
    The madd dogges foames, and adders eares;
    The spurging of a deadmans eyes:
    And all since the evening starre did rise.

                                3 WITCH.

    I last night lay all alone
    O' the ground, to heare the mandrake grone;                       10
    And pluckt him up, though he grew full low:
    And, as I had done, the cocke did crow.

                                4 WITCH.

    And I ha' beene chusing out this scull
    From charnell houses that were full;
    From private grots, and publike pits;                             15
    And frighted a sexton out of his wits.

                                5 WITCH.

    Under a cradle I did crepe
    By day; and, when the childe was a-sleepe
    At night, I suck'd the breath; and rose,
    And pluck'd the nodding nurse by the nose.                        20

                                6 WITCH.

    I had a dagger: what did I with that?
    Killed an infant to have his fat.
    A piper it got at a church-ale,[412]
    I bade him again blow wind i' the taile.

                                7 WITCH.

    A murderer, yonder, was hung in chaines;                          25
    The sunne and the wind had shrunke his veines:
    I bit off a sinew; I clipp'd his haire;
    I brought off his ragges, that danc'd i' the ayre.

                                8 WITCH.

    The scrich-owles egges and the feathers blacke,
    The bloud of the frogge, and the bone in his backe                30
    I have been getting; and made of his skin
    A purset, to keep sir Cranion[413] in.

                                9 WITCH.

    And I ha' beene plucking (plants among)
    Hemlock, henbane, adders-tongue,
    Night-shade, moone-wort, libbards-bane[414];                      35
    And twise by the dogges was like to be tane.

                               10 WITCH.

    I from the jawes of a gardiner's bitch
    Did snatch these bones, and then leap'd the ditch:
    Yet went I back to the house againe,
    Kill'd the blacke cat, and here is the braine.                    40

                               11 WITCH.

    I went to the toad, breedes under the wall,
    I charmed him out, and he came at my call;
    I scratch'd out the eyes of the owle before;
    I tore the batts wing: what would you have more?

                               DAME.[415]

    Yes: I have brought, to helpe your vows,                          45
    Horned poppie, cypresse boughes,
    The fig-tree wild, that growes on tombes,
    And juice, that from the larch-tree comes,
      The basiliskes bloud, and the viper's skin:
      And now our orgies let's begin.                                 50

FOOTNOTES:

[411] [These witches are called Hags by Jonson.]

[412] [a wake or feast in commemoration of the dedication of a church.]

[413] [skull.]

[414] [the herb wolfbane.]

[415] [Jonson meant the Dame to represent Ate or the goddess of
Mischief.]




XXIV.

ROBIN GOOD-FELLOW,


Alias _Pucke_, alias _Hobgoblin_, in the creed of ancient superstition,
was a kind of merry sprite, whose character and atchievements are
recorded in this ballad, and in those well-known lines of Milton's
_L'Allegro_, which the antiquarian Peck supposes to be owing to it:

    "Tells how the drudging _Goblin_ swet
    To earn his creame-bowle duly set;
    When in one night ere glimpse of morne,
    His shadowy flail hath thresh'd the corn
    That ten day-labourers could not end;
    Then lies him down the lubber fiend,
    And stretch'd out all the chimneys length,
    Basks at the fire his hairy strength,
    And crop-full out of doors he flings,
    Ere the first cock his matins rings."

The reader will observe that our simple ancestors had reduced all
these whimsies to a kind of system, as regular, and perhaps more
consistent, than many parts of classic mythology: a proof of the
extensive influence and vast antiquity of these superstitions. Mankind,
and especially the common people, could not every where have been so
unanimously agreed concerning these arbitrary notions, if they had
not prevailed among them for many ages. Indeed, a learned friend in
Wales assures the Editor, that the existence of Fairies and Goblins is
alluded to by the most ancient British Bards, who mention them under
various names, one of the most common of which signifies, _The spirits
of the mountains_. See also Preface to Song XXV.

This song, which Peck attributes to Ben Jonson, (tho' it is not found
among his works) is chiefly printed from an ancient black-letter copy
in the British Museum. It seems to have been originally intended for
some Masque.

It is intitled, in the old black-letter copies, _The mad merry_
_Prankes of Robin Goodfellow_. To the tune of _Dulcina_, &c. (See No.
XIII. above.)

To one, if not more of the old copies, are prefixed two wooden cuts,
said to be taken from Bulwer's _Artificial Changeling, &c._, which,
as they seem to correspond with the notions then entertained of the
whimsical appearances of this fantastic spirit, and perhaps were copied
in the dresses in which he was formerly exhibited on the stage, are, to
gratify the curious, engraven below.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [The copy in the Roxburghe _Collection_ (ed. Chappell, vol. ii. pl.
  i. p. 80) is printed by H[enry] G[osson], who was a contemporary
  of Ben Jonson. Some little books in prose on _Robin Goodfellow_,
  written in the seventeenth century, were printed for the Percy
  Society by Mr. J. P. Collier.]

       *       *       *       *       *

    From Oberon, in fairye land,
        The king of ghosts and shadowes there,
    Mad Robin I, at his command,
        Am sent to viewe the night-sports here.
            What revell rout                                           5
            Is kept about,
        In every corner where I go,
            I will o'ersee,
            And merry bee,
        And make good sport, with ho, ho, ho!                         10

    More swift than lightening can I flye
        About this aery welkin soone,
    And, in a minutes space, descrye
        Each thing that's done belowe the moone,
            There's not a hag                                         15
            Or ghost shall wag,
        Or cry, ware Goblins! where I go;
            But Robin I
            Their feates will spy,
        And send them home, with ho, ho, ho!                          20

    Whene'er such wanderers I meete,
        As from their night-sports they trudge home;
    With counterfeiting voice I greete
        And call them on, with me to roame
            Thro' woods, thro' lakes,                                 25
            Thro' bogs, thro' brakes;
        Or else, unseene, with them I go,
            All in the nicke
            To play some tricke
        And frolicke it, with ho, ho, ho!                             30

    Sometimes I meete them like a man;
        Sometimes, an ox, sometimes, a hound;
    And to a horse I turn me can;
        To trip and trot about them round.
            But if, to ride,                                          35
            My backe they stride,
        More swift than wind away I go,
            Ore hedge and lands,
            Thro' pools and ponds
        I whirry, laughing, ho, ho, ho!                               40

    When lads and lasses merry be,
        With possets and with juncates fine;
    Unseene of all the company,
        I eat their cakes and sip their wine;
            And, to make sport,                                       45
            I fart and snort;
        And out the candles I do blow:
            The maids I kiss;
            They shrieke--Who's this?
        I answer nought, but ho, ho, ho!                              50

    Yet now and then, the maids to please,
        At midnight I card up their wooll;
    And while they sleepe, and take their ease,
        With wheel to threads their flax I pull.
            I grind at mill                                           55
            Their malt up still;
        I dress their hemp, I spin their tow.
            If any 'wake,
            And would me take,
        I wend me, laughing, ho, ho, ho!                              60

    When house or harth doth sluttish lye,[416]
        I pinch the maidens blacke and blue;
    The bed-clothes from the bedd pull I,
        And lay them naked all to view.
            'Twixt sleepe and wake,                                   65
            I do them take,
        And on the key-cold floor them throw.
            If out they cry,
            Then forth I fly,
        And loudly laugh out, ho, ho, ho!                             70

    When any need to borrowe ought,
        We lend them what they do require;
    And for the use demand we nought;
        Our owne is all we do desire.
            If to repay,                                              75
            They do delay,
        Abroad amongst them then I go,
            And night by night,
            I them affright
        With pinchings, dreames, and ho, ho, ho!                      80

    When lazie queans have nought to do,
        But study how to cog and lye;
    To make debate and mischief too,
        'Twixt one another secretlye:
            I marke their gloze,                                      85
            And it disclose,
        To them whom they have wronged so;
            When I have done,
            I get me gone,
        And leave them scolding, ho, ho, ho!                          90

    When men do traps and engins set
        In loop-holes, where the vermine creepe,
    Who from their foldes and houses, get
        Their duckes and geese, and lambes and sheepe:
            I spy the gin,                                            95
            And enter in,
        And seeme a vermine taken so;
            But when they there
            Approach me neare,
        I leap out laughing, ho, ho, ho!                             100

    By wells and rills,[417] in meadowes greene,
        We nightly dance our hey-day guise;[418]
    And to our fairye king, and queene,
        We chant our moon-light minstrelsies.
            When larks 'gin sing,                                    105
            Away we fling;
        And babes new borne steal as we go,
            And else in bed,
            We leave instead,
        And wend us laughing, ho, ho, ho!                            110

    From hag-bred Merlin's time have I
        Thus nightly revell'd to and fro:
    And for my pranks men call me by
        The name of Robin Good-fellow.
            Fiends, ghosts, and sprites,                             115
            Who haunt the nightes,
        The hags and goblins do me know;
            And beldames old
            My feates have told;
        So _Vale, Vale_; ho, ho, ho!                                 120

FOOTNOTES:

[416] [Ver. 61. this begins the second part in the Roxburghe copy.]

[417] [gills=rivulets, _Roxb. copy_.]

[418] [a misprint for heydegies=rustic dances. The word occurs in
Lily's _Endymion_, 1591, and in Wm. Bulleyn's _Dialogue_, 1564, where
the minstrel daunces "Trenchmore" and "Heie de gie."--_Chappell._]




XXV.

THE FAIRY QUEEN.


We have here a short display of the popular belief concerning
_Fairies_. It will afford entertainment to a contemplative mind to
trace these whimsical opinions up to their origin. Whoever considers,
how early, how extensively, and how uniformly, they have prevailed in
these nations, will not readily assent to the hypothesis of those, who
fetch them from the east so late as the time of the Croisades. Whereas
it is well known that our Saxon ancestors, long before they left their
German forests, believed the existence of a kind of diminutive demons,
or middle species between men and spirits, whom they called _Duergar_
or _Dwarfs_, and to whom they attributed many wonderful performances,
far exceeding human art. Vid. Hervarer Saga Olaj Verelj. 1675. Hickes'
Thesaur., &c.

This Song is given (with some corrections by another copy) from a book
intitled, _The Mysteries of Love and Eloquence, &c._ Lond. 1658, 8vo.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [Dr. Rimbault points out that this song occurs in a rare tract
  published more than twenty years before the book mentioned above.
  It is entitled, _A description of the King and Queen of the_
  _Fayries, their habit, fare, abode, pomp and state, being very
  delightful to the sense and full of mirth_. London, 1635. The
  song was to be sung to the tune of the _Spanish Gypsie_, which
  began--

    "O follow, follow me
    For we be gypsies three."

  Martin Parker wrote a sort of parody called _The three merry_
  _Cobblers_, commencing--

    "Come follow, follow me
    To the alehouse we'll march all three;
    Leave awl, last, thread and leather,
    And let's go all together."

  Mr. Chappell prints the first, eighth, fourteenth and last stanzas
  (_Popular Music_, vol. i. p. 272.)]

       *       *       *       *       *

    Come, follow, follow me,
    You, fairy elves that be:
    Which circle on the greene,
    Come follow Mab your queene.
    Hand in hand let's dance around,                                   5
    For this place is fairye ground.

      When mortals are at rest,
      And snoring in their nest;
      Unheard, and un-espy'd,
      Through key-holes we do glide;                                  10
    Over tables, stools, and shelves.
    We trip it with our fairy elves.

      And, if the house be foul[419]
      With platter, dish or bowl,
      Up stairs we nimbly creep,                                      15
      And find the sluts asleep:
    There we pinch their armes and thighes;
    None escapes, nor none espies.

      But if the house be swept,
      And from uncleanness kept,                                      20
      We praise the household maid,
      And duely she is paid:
    For we use before we goe
    To drop a tester[420] in her shoe.

      Upon a mushroomes head                                          25
      Our table-cloth we spread;
      A grain of rye, or wheat,
      Is manchet,[421] which we eat;
    Pearly drops of dew we drink
    In acorn cups fill'd to the brink.                                30

      The brains of nightingales,
      With unctuous fat of snailes,
      Between two cockles stew'd,
      Is meat that's easily chew'd;
    Tailes of wormes, and marrow of mice                              35
    Do make a dish, that's wonderous nice.

      The grashopper, gnat, and fly,
      Serve for our minstrelsie;
      Grace said, we dance a while,
      And so the time beguile;                                        40
    And if the moon doth hide her head,
    The gloe-worm lights us home to bed.

      On tops of dewie grasse
      So nimbly do we passe,
      The young and tender stalk                                      45
      Ne'er bends when we do walk:
    Yet in the morning may be seen
    Where we the night before have been.

FOOTNOTES:

[419] [Puck's speech in _Midsummer Night's Dream_ (act v. sc. 2)--

    "I am sent with broom before
    To sweep the dust behind the door,"

illustrates the delight of the fairies in cleanliness, which is dwelt
upon in this and the following song.]

[420] [tester or teston=sixpence.]

[421] [best kind of white bread.]




XXVI.

THE FAIRIES FAREWELL.


This humorous old song fell from the hand of the witty Dr. _Corbet_
(afterwards bishop of Norwich, &c.) and is printed from his _Poëtica
Stromata_, 1648, 12mo. (compared with the third edition of his poems,
1672.) It is there called, _A proper new Ballad, intitled, The Fairies
Farewell, or God-a-mercy Will, to be sung or whistled to the tune of
The Meddow brow, by the learned; by the unlearned, to the tune of
Fortune_.

The departure of Fairies is here attributed to the abolition of
monkery: Chaucer has, with equal humour, assigned a cause the very
reverse, in his _Wife of Bath's Tale_.

    "In olde dayes of the king Artour,
    Of which that Bretons speken gret honour,
    All was this lond fulfilled of faerie;
    The elf-quene, with hire joly compagnie
    Danced ful oft in many a grene mede.
    This was the old opinion as I rede;
    I speke of many hundred yeres ago;
    But now can no man see non elves mo,
    For now the grete charitee and prayeres
    Of limitoures and other holy freres,
    That serchen every land and every streme,
    As thikke as motes in the sonne beme,
    Blissing halles, chambres, kichenes, and boures,
    Citees and burghes, castles high and toures,
    Thropes and bernes, shepenes and dairies,
    This maketh that ther ben no faeries:
    For ther as wont to walken was an elf,
    Ther walketh now the limitour himself,
    In undermeles and in morweninges,
    And sayth his Matines and his holy thinges,
    As he goth in his limitatioun.
    Women may now go safely up and doun,
    In every bush, and under every tree,
    Ther is non other incubus but he,
    And he ne will don hem no dishonour."

                                  Tyrwhitt's _Chaucer_, i. p. 255.

Dr. Richard Corbet, having been bishop of Oxford about three years, and
afterwards as long bishop of Norwich, died in 1635, Ætat. 52.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Farewell rewards and Fairies!
      Good housewives now may say;
    For now foule sluts in dairies,
      Doe fare as well as they:
    And though they sweepe their hearths no less                       5
      Than mayds were wont to doe,
    Yet who of late for cleaneliness
      Finds sixe-pence in her shoe?

    Lament, lament old Abbies,
      The fairies lost command;                                       10
    They did but change priests babies,
      But some have chang'd your land:

    And all your children stoln from thence
      Are now growne Puritanes,
    Who live as changelings ever since,                               15
      For love of your demaines.

    At morning and at evening both
      You merry were and glad,
    So little care of sleepe and sloth,
      These prettie ladies had.                                       20
    When Tom came home from labour,
      Or Ciss to milking rose,
    Then merrily went their tabour,
      And nimbly went their toes.

    Witness those rings and roundelayes                               25
      Of theirs, which yet remaine;
    Were footed in queene Maries dayes
      On many a grassy playne.
    But since of late Elizabeth
      And later James came in;                                        30
    They never danc'd on any heath,
      As when the time hath bin.

    By which wee note the fairies                                     35
      Were of the old profession:
    Their songs were _Ave Maries_,
      Their dances were procession.
    But now, alas! they all are dead,
      Or gone beyond the seas,
    Or farther for religion fled,
     Or else they take their ease.                                    40

    A tell-tale in their company
      They never could endure;
    And whoso kept not secretly
      Their mirth, was punish'd sure:

    It was a just and christian deed                                  45
      To pinch such blacke and blue:
    O how the common-welth doth need
      Such justices, as you!

    Now they have left our quarters;
      A Register they have,                                           50
    Who can preserve their charters;
      A man both wise and grave.
    An hundred of their merry pranks
      By one that I could name
    Are kept in store; con twenty thanks                              55
      To William for the same.

    To William Churne of Staffordshire
      Give laud and praises due,
    Who every meale can mend your cheare
      With tales both old and true:                                   60
    To William all give audience,
      And pray yee for his noddle:
    For all the fairies evidence
      Were lost, if it were addle.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [***] After these _Songs_ on the _Fairies_, the reader may be
  curious to see the manner in which they were formerly invoked
  and bound to human service. In Ashmole's _Collection of MSS._ at
  Oxford (Num. 8259. 1406. 2), are the papers of some alchymist,
  which contain a variety of Incantations and Forms of Conjuring both
  _Fairies_, _Witches_, and _Demons_, principally, as it should seem,
  to assist him in his Great Work of transmuting Metals. Most of them
  are too impious to be reprinted: but the two following may be very
  innocently laughed at.

  Whoever looks into Ben Jonson's _Alchymist_, will find that these
  impostors, among their other secrets, affected to have a power over
  _Fairies_: and that they were commonly expected to be seen in a
  christal glass appears from that extraordinary book, _The Relation_
  _of Dr. John Dee's actions with Spirits_, 1659, folio.

  _"An excellent way_ to gett a _Fayrie_. (For myself I call
  _Margarett Barrance_; but this will obteine any one that is not
  allready bownd.)

  "First, gett a broad square christall or Venice glasse, in length
  and breadth 3 inches. Then lay that glasse or christall in the
  bloud of a white henne, 3 Wednesdayes, or 3 Fridayes. Then take it
  out, and wash it with holy aq. and fumigate it. Then take 3 hazle
  sticks, or wands of an yeare groth: pill them fayre and white;
  and make 'them' soe longe, as you write the _Spiritts_ name, or
  _Fayries_ name, which you call, 3 times on every sticke being made
  flatt on one side. Then bury them under some hill, whereas you
  suppose _Fayries_ haunt, the Wednesday before you call her: and the
  Friday followinge take them uppe, and call her at 8 or 3 or 10 of
  the clocke, which be good planetts and houres for that turne: but
  when you call, be in cleane life, and turne thy face towards the
  east. And when you have her, bind her to that stone or glasse."

        "An Unguent to annoynt under the Eyelids, and upon the
        Eyelids eveninge and morninge: but especially when you call;
        or find your sight not perfect.

  "R. A pint of sallet-oyle, and put it into a viall glasse: but
  first wash it with rose-water, and marygold-water; the flowers 'to'
  be gathered towards the east. Wash it till the oyle come white;
  then put it into the glasse, _ut supra_: and then put thereto the
  budds of holyhocke, the flowers of marygold, the flowers or toppes
  of wild thime, the budds of young hazle: and the thime must be
  gathered neare the side of a hill where _Fayries_ use to be: and
  'take' the grasse of a fayrie throne, there. All these put into the
  oyle, into the glasse: and set it to dissolve 3 dayes in the sunne,
  and then keep it for thy use; _ut supra_."

  After this receipt for the unguent follows a form of incantation,
  wherein the alchymist conjures a fairy, named _Elaby Gathon_, to
  appear to him in that chrystal glass, meekly and mildly; to resolve
  him truly in all manner of questions; and to be obedient to all his
  commands, under pain of damnation, &c.

  One of the vulgar opinions about fairies is, that they cannot be
  seen by human eyes, without a particular charm exerted in favour of
  the person who is to see them: and that they strike with blindness
  such as having the gift of seeing them, take notice of them
  _mal-à-propos_.

  As to the hazle sticks mentioned above, they were to be probably of
  that species called the _witch hazle_; which received its name from
  this manner of applying it in incantations.

                      THE END OF BOOK THE SECOND.

[Illustration]

                   RELIQUES OF ANCIENT POETRY, ETC.

                           SERIES THE THIRD.




BOOK III.


[Illustration]

[Illustration]




I.

THE BIRTH OF ST. GEORGE.


The incidents in this, and the other ballad of _St. George and
the Dragon_, are chiefly taken from the old story-book of the Seven
Champions of Christendome; which, tho' now the play-thing of children,
was once in high repute. Bp. Hall in his _Satires_, published in 1597,
ranks

            "St. George's sorell, and his cross of blood,"

among the most popular stories of his time: and an ingenious critic
thinks that Spencer himself did not disdain to borrow hints from
it;[422] tho' I much doubt whether this popular romance were written so
early as the _Faery Queen_.

The author of this book of the _Seven Champions_ was one Richard
Johnson, who lived in the reigns of Elizabeth and James, as we collect
from his other publications: viz.--_The nine worthies of London_:
1592, 4to.--_The pleasant walks of Moor fields_: 1607, 4to.--_A crown
garland of Goulden Roses, gathered, &c._ 1612, 8vo.--_The life and
death of Rob. Cecill, E. of Salisbury_: 1612, 4to.--_The Hist. of Tom
of Lincoln_, 4to. is also by R. J. who likewise reprinted _Don Flores
of Greece_, 4to.

The _Seven Champions_, tho' written in a wild inflated style, contains
some strong Gothic painting; which seems, for the most part, copied
from the metrical romances of former ages. At least the story of _St.
George and the fair Sabra_ is taken almost verbatim from the old
poetical legend of _Syr Bevis of Hampton_.

This very antique poem was in great fame in Chaucer's time (see above,
pag. 107.), and so continued till the introduction of printing, when
it ran thro' several editions; two of which are in black letter,
4to. "imprinted by Wyllyam Copland," without date; containing great
variations.

As a specimen of the poetic powers of this very old rhimist, and as a
proof how closely the author of the _Seven Champions_ has followed him,
take a description of the dragon slain by sir Bevis.

    "--Whan the dragon, that foule is,
    Had a syght of syr Bevis,
    He cast up a loude cry,
    As it had thondred in the sky;
    He turned his bely towarde the son;
    It was greater than any tonne:
    His scales was bryghter then the glas,
    And harder they were than any bras:
    Betwene his shulder and his tayle,
    Was forty fote withoute fayle.
    He waltred out of his denne,
    And Bevis pricked his stede then,
    And to hym a spere he thraste
    That all to shyvers he it braste:
    The dragon then gan Bevis assayle,
    And smote syr Bevis with his tayle;
    Then downe went horse and man,
    And two rybbes of Bevis brused than."

After a long fight, at length, as the dragon was preparing to fly, sir
Bevis

    "Hit him under the wynge,
    As he was in his flyenge,
    There he was tender without scale,
    And Bevis thought to be his bale.
    He smote after, as I you saye,
    With his good sword Morglaye.
    Up to the hiltes Morglay yode
    Through harte, lyver, bone, and bloude:
    To the ground fell the dragon,
    Great joye syr Bevis begon.
    Under the scales al on hight
    He smote off his head forth right,
    And put it on a spere: &c."

                                                           Sign. K. iv.

Sir Bevis's dragon is evidently the parent of that in the _Seven_
_Champions_, see chap, iii., viz. "The dragon no sooner had a sight of
him (St. George) but he gave such a terrible peal, as though it had
thundered in the elements.... Betwixt his shoulders and his tail were
fifty feet in distance, his scales glistering as bright as silver, but
far more hard than brass; his belly of the colour of gold, but bigger
than a tun. Thus weltered he from his den, &c.... The champion ... gave
the dragon such a thrust with his spear, that it shivered in a thousand
pieces: whereat the furious dragon so fiercely smote him with his
venomous tail, that down fell man and horse: in which fall two of St.
George's ribs were so bruised, &c.--At length ... St. George smote the
dragon under the wing where it was tender without scale, whereby his
good sword Ascalon with an easie passage went to the very hilt through
both the dragon's heart, liver, bone, and blood.--Then St. George--cut
off the dragon's head and pitcht it upon the truncheon of a spear, &c."

The _History of the Seven Champions_, being written just before the
decline of books of chivalry, was never, I believe, translated into any
foreign language: But _Le Roman de Beuves of Hantonne_ was published at
Paris in 1502, 4to. Let. Gothique.

The learned Selden tell us, that about the time of the Norman invasion
was Bevis famous with the title of Earl of Southampton, whose residence
was at Duncton in Wiltshire; but he observes, that the monkish
enlargements of his story have made his very existence doubted. See
_Notes on Poly-Olbion, Song_ iii.

This hath also been the case of _St. George_ himself; whose martial
history is allowed to be apocryphal. But, to prove that there really
existed an orthodox saint of this name (altho' little or nothing, it
seems, is known of his genuine story) is the subject of _An Historical
and Critical Inquiry into the Existence and Character of St. George,
&c._ By the Rev. J. Milner, F.S.A. 1792, 8vo.

The equestrian figure worn by the Knights of the Garter, has been
understood to be an emblem of the Christian warrior, in his spiritual
armour, vanquishing the old serpent.

But on this subject the inquisitive reader may consult _A Dissertation_
_on the Original of the Equestrian Figure of the George and of the
Garter, ensigns of the most noble order of that name_. Illustrated
with copper-plates. By John Petingal, A.M., Fellow of the Society of
Antiquaries, London, 1753, 4to. This learned and curious work the
author of the _Historical and Critical Inquiry_ would have done well to
have seen.

It cannot be denied, but that the following ballad is for the most part
modern: for which reason it would have been thrown to the end of the
volume, had not its subject procured it a place here.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [In respect to the last paragraph, Ritson writes, "It may be safely
  denied, however, that the least part of it is ancient."]

       *       *       *       *       *

    Listen, lords, in bower and hall,
      I sing the wonderous birth
    Of brave St. George, whose valorous arm
      Rid monsters from the earth:

    Distressed ladies to relieve                                       5
      He travell'd many a day;
    In honour of the christian faith,
      Which shall endure for aye.

    In Coventry sometime did dwell
      A knight of worthy fame,                                        10
    High steward of this noble realme;
      Lord Albert was his name.

    He had to wife a princely dame,
      Whose beauty did excell.
    This virtuous lady, being with child,                             15
      In sudden sadness fell:

    For thirty nights no sooner sleep
      Had clos'd her wakeful eyes,
    But, lo! a foul and fearful dream
      Her fancy would surprize:                                       20

    She dreamt a dragon fierce and fell
      Conceiv'd within her womb;
    Whose mortal fangs her body rent
      Ere he to life could come.

    All woe-begone, and sad was she;                                  25
      She nourisht constant woe:
    Yet strove to hide it from her lord,
      Lest he should sorrow know.

    In vain she strove, her tender lord,
      Who watch'd her slightest look,                                 30
    Discover'd soon her secret pain,
      And soon that pain partook.

    And when to him the fearful cause
      She weeping did impart,
    With kindest speech he strove to heal                             35
      The anguish of her heart.

    Be comforted, my lady dear,
      Those pearly drops refrain;
    Betide me weal, betide me woe,
      I'll try to ease thy pain.                                      40

    And for this foul and fearful dream,
      That causeth all thy woe,
    Trust me I'll travel far away
      But I'll the meaning knowe.

    Then giving many a fond embrace,                                  45
      And shedding many a teare,
    To the weïrd lady of the woods
      He purpos'd to repaire.

    To the weïrd lady of the woods,
      Full long and many a day,                                       50
    Thro' lonely shades, and thickets rough
      He winds his weary way.

    At length he reach'd a dreary dell
      With dismal yews o'erhung;
    Where cypress spred its mournful boughs,                          55
      And pois'nous nightshade sprung.

    No chearful gleams here pierc'd the gloom,
      He hears no chearful sound;
    But shrill night-ravens' yelling scream,
      And serpents hissing round.                                     60

    The shriek of fiends, and damned ghosts
      Ran howling thro' his ear:
    A chilling horror froze his heart,
      Tho' all unus'd to fear.

    Three times he strives to win his way,
      And pierce those sickly dews:
    Three times to bear his trembling corse
      His knocking knees refuse.

    At length upon his beating breast
      He signs the holy crosse;                                       70
    And, rouzing up his wonted might,
      He treads th' unhallow'd mosse.

    Beneath a pendant craggy cliff,
      All vaulted like a grave,
    And opening in the solid rock,                                    75
      He found the inchanted cave.

    An iron gate clos'd up the mouth,
      All hideous and forlorne;
    And, fasten'd by a silver chain,
      Near hung a brazed horne.                                       80

    Then offering up a secret prayer,
      Three times he blowes amaine:
    Three times a deepe and hollow sound
      Did answer him againe.

    "Sir knight, thy lady beares a son,                               85
      Who, like a dragon bright,
    Shall prove most dreadful to his foes,
      And terrible in fight.

    "His name advanc'd in future times
      On banners shall be worn:                                       90
    But lo! thy lady's life must passe
      Before he can be born."

    All sore opprest with fear and doubt
      Long time lord Albert stood;
    At length he winds his doubtful way                               95
      Back thro' the dreary wood.

    Eager to clasp his lovely dame
      Then fast he travels back:
    But when he reach'd his castle gate,
      His gate was hung with black.                                  100

    In every court and hall he found
      A sullen silence reigne;
    Save where, amid the lonely towers,
      He heard her maidens 'plaine;

    And bitterly lament and weep,                                    105
      With many a grievous grone:
    Then sore his bleeding heart misgave,
      His lady's life was gone.

    With faultering step he enters in,
      Yet half affraid to goe;                                       110
    With trembling voice asks why they grieve,
      Yet fears the cause to knowe.

    "Three times the sun hath rose and set;"
      They said, then stopt to weep:
    "Since heaven hath laid thy lady deare                           115
      In death's eternal sleep.

    "For, ah! in travel sore she fell,
      So sore that she must dye;
    Unless some shrewd and cunning leech
      Could ease her presentlye.                                     120

    "But when a cunning leech was fet,
      Too soon declared he,
    She, or her babe must lose its life;
      Both saved could not be.

    "Now take my life, thy lady said,                                125
      My little infant save:
    And O commend me to my lord,
      When I am laid in grave.

    "O tell him how that precious babe
      Cost him a tender wife:                                        130
    And teach my son to lisp her name,
      Who died to save his life.

    "Then calling still upon thy name,
      And praying still for thee;
    Without repining or complaint,                                   135
      Her gentle soul did flee."

    What tongue can paint lord Albret's woe,
      The bitter tears he shed,
    The bitter pangs that wrung his heart,
      To find his lady dead?                                         140

    He beat his breast: he tore his hair;
      And shedding many a tear,
    At length he askt to see his son;
      The son that cost so dear.

    New sorrowe seiz'd the damsells all:                             145
      At length they faultering say;
    "Alas! my lord, how shall we tell?
      Thy son is stoln away.

    "Fair as the sweetest flower of spring,
      Such was his infant mien:                                      150
    And on his little body stampt
      Three wonderous marks were seen:

    "A blood-red cross was on his arm;
      A dragon on his breast:
    A little garter all of gold                                      155
      Was round his leg exprest.

    "Three carefull nurses we provide
      Our little lord to keep:
    One gave him sucke, one gave him food,
      And one did lull to sleep.                                     160

    "But lo! all in the dead of night,
      We heard a fearful sound:
    Loud thunder clapt; the castle shook;
      And lightning flasht around.

    "Dead with affright at first we lay;                             165
      But rousing up anon,
    We ran to see our little lord:
      Our little lord was gone!

    "But how or where we could not tell;
      For lying on the ground,                                       170
    In deep and magic slumbers laid,
      The nurses there we found."

    O grief on grief! lord Albret said:
      No more his tongue cou'd say,
    When falling in a deadly swoone,                                 175
      Long time he lifeless lay.

    At length restor'd to life and sense
      He nourisht endless woe,
    No future joy his heart could taste,
      No future comfort know.                                        180

    So withers on the mountain top
      A fair and stately oake,
    Whose vigorous arms are torne away,
      By some rude thunder-stroke.

    At length his castle irksome grew,                               185
      He loathes his wonted home;
    His native country he forsakes
      In foreign lands to roame.

    There up and downe he wandered far,
      Clad in a palmer's gown;                                       190
    Till his brown locks grew white as wool,
      His beard as thistle down.

    At length, all wearied, down in death
      He laid his reverend head.
    Meantime amid the lonely wilds                                   195
      His little son was bred.

    There the weïrd lady of the woods
      Had borne him far away,
    And train'd him up in feates of armes,
      And every martial play.                                        200

                                                 [***]

FOOTNOTES:

[422] Mr. Warton. Vid. Observations on the _Fairy Queen_, 2 vol. 1762,
12mo. _passim._




II.

ST. GEORGE AND THE DRAGON.


The following ballad is given (with some corrections) from two ancient
black-letter copies in the _Pepys Collection_: one of which is in
12mo., the other in folio.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [The story of _St. George and the Dragon_ is found in many forms in
  the northern languages.]

       *       *       *       *       *

    Of Hector's deeds did Homer sing;
        And of the sack of stately Troy,
    What griefs fair Helena did bring,
        Which was sir Paris' only joy:
    And by my pen I will recite                                        5
    St. George's deeds, and English knight.

    Against the Sarazens so rude
        Fought he full long and many a day,
    Where many gyants he subdu'd,
        In honour of the christian way:                               10
    And after many adventures past
    To Egypt land he came at last.

    Now, as the story plain doth tell,
        Within that countrey there did rest
    A dreadful dragon fierce and fell,                                15
        Whereby they were full sore opprest;
    Who by his poisonous breath each day,
    Did many of the city slay.

    The grief whereof did grow so great
        Throughout the limits of the land,                            20
    That they their wise-men did intreat
        To shew their cunning out of hand;
    What way they might this fiend destroy,
    That did the countrey thus annoy.

    The wise-men all before the king                                  25
        This answer fram'd incontinent;
    The dragon none to death might bring
        By any means they could invent:
    His skin more hard than brass was found,
    That sword nor spear could pierce nor wound.                      30

    When this the people understood,
        They cryed out most piteouslye,
    The dragon's breath infects their blood,
        That every day in heaps they dye:
    Among them such a plague it bred,                                 35
    The living scarce could bury the dead.

    No means there were, as they could hear,
        For to appease the dragon's rage,
    But to present some virgin clear,
        Whose blood his fury might asswage;                           40
    Each day he would a maiden eat,
    For to allay his hunger great.

    This thing by art the wise-men found,
        Which truly must observed be;
    Wherefore throughout the city round                               45
        A virgin pure of good degree

    Was by the king's commission still
    Taken up to serve the dragon's will.

    Thus did the dragon every day
        Untimely crop some virgin flowr,                              50
    Till all the maids were worn away,
        And none were left him to devour:
    Saving the king's fair daughter bright,
    Her father's only heart's delight.

    Then came the officers to the king                                55
        That heavy message to declare,
    Which did his heart with sorrow sting;
        She is, quoth he, my kingdom's heir:
    O let us all be poisoned here,
    Ere she should die, that is my dear.                              60

    Then rose the people presently,
        And to the king in rage they went;
    They said his daughter dear should dye,
        The dragon's fury to prevent:
    Our daughters all are dead, quoth they,                           65
    And have been made the dragon's prey:

    And by their blood we rescued were,
        And thou hast sav'd thy life thereby;
    And now in sooth it is but faire,
        For us thy daughter so should die.                            70
    O save my daughter, said the king;
    And let ME feel the dragon's sting.

    Then fell fair Sabra on her knee,
        And to her father dear did say,
    O father, strive not thus for me,                                 75
        But let me be the dragon's prey;
    It may be, for my sake alone
    This plague upon the land was thrown.

    Tis better I should dye, she said,
        Than all your subjects perish quite;                          80
    Perhaps the dragon here was laid,
        For my offence to work his spite:
    And after he hath suckt my gore,
    Your land shall feel the grief no more.

    What hast thou done, my daughter dear,                            85
        For to deserve this heavy scourge?
    It is my fault, as may appear,
        Which makes the gods our state to purge;
    Then ought I die, to stint the strife,
    And to preserve thy happy life.                                   90

    Like mad-men, all the people cried,
        Thy death to us can do no good;
    Our safety only doth abide
        In making her the dragon's food.
    Lo! here I am, I come, quoth she,                                 95
    Therefore do what you will with me.

    Nay stay, dear daughter, quoth the queen,
        And as thou art a virgin bright,
    That hast for vertue famous been,
        So let me cloath thee all in white;                          100
    And crown thy head with flowers sweet,
    An ornament for virgins meet.

    And when she was attired so,
        According to her mother's mind,
    Unto the stake then did she go;                                  105
        To which her tender limbs they bind:
    And being bound to stake a thrall
    She bade farewell unto them all.

    Farewell, my father dear, quoth she,
        And my sweet mother meek and mild;                           110
    Take you no thought nor weep for me,
    For you may have another child:

    Since for my country's good I dye,
    Death I receive most willinglye.

    The king and queen and all their train                           115
        With weeping eyes went then their way,
    And let their daughter there remain,
        To be the hungry dragon's prey:
    But as she did there weeping lye,
    Behold St. George came riding by.                                120

    And seeing there a lady bright
        So rudely tyed unto a stake,
    As well became a valiant knight,
        He straight to her his way did take:
    Tell me, sweet maiden, then quoth he,                            125
    What caitif thus abuseth thee?

    And, lo! by Christ his cross I vow,
        Which here is figured on my breast,
    I will revenge it on his brow,
        And break my lance upon his chest:                           130
    And speaking thus whereas he stood,
    The dragon issued from the wood.

    The lady that did first espy
        The dreadful dragon coming so,
    Unto St. George aloud did cry,                                   135
        And willed him away to go;
    Here comes that cursed fiend, quoth she;
    That soon will make an end of me.

    St. George then looking round about,
        The fiery dragon soon espy'd,                                140
    And like a knight of courage stout,
        Against him did most fiercely ride;
    And with such blows he did him greet,
    He fell beneath his horse's feet.

    For with his launce that was so strong,                          145
        As he came gaping in his face,
    In at his mouth he thrust along;
        For he could pierce no other place:
    And thus within the lady's view
    This mighty dragon straight he slew.                             150

    The savour of his poisoned breath
        Could do this holy knight no harm.
    Thus he the lady sav'd from death,
        And home he led her by the arm;
    Which when king Ptolemy did see,                                 155
    There was great mirth and melody.

    When as that valiant champion there
        Had slain the dragon in the field,
    To court he brought the lady fair,
        Which to their hearts much joy did yield.                    160
    He in the court of Egypt staid
    Till he most falsely was betray'd.

    That lady dearly lov'd the knight,
        He counted her his only joy;                                 165
    But when their love was brought to light
        It turn'd unto their great annoy:
    Th' Morocco king was in the court,
    Who to the orchard did resort,

    Dayly to take the pleasant air,                                  170
        For pleasure sake he us'd to walk,
    Under a wall he oft did hear
        St. George with lady Sabra talk:
    Their love he shew'd unto the king,
    Which to St. George great woe did bring.                         175

    Those kings together did devise
        To make the christian knight away,
    With letters him in curteous wise
        They straightway sent to Persia:

    But wrote to the sophy him to kill,                              180
    And treacherously his blood to spill.

    Thus they for good did him reward
        With evil, and most subtilly
    By much vile meanes they had regard
        To work his death most cruelly;                              185
    Who, as through Persia land he rode,
    With zeal destroy'd each idol god.

    For which offence he straight was thrown
        Into a dungeon dark and deep;
    Where, when he thought his wrongs upon,                          190
        He bitterly did wail and weep:
    Yet like a knight of courage stout,
    At length his way he digged out.

    Three grooms of the king of Persia
        By night this valiant champion slew,                         195
    Though he had fasted many a day;
        And then away from thence he flew
    On the best steed the sophy had;
    Which when he knew he was full mad.

    Towards Christendom he made his flight,                          200
        But met a gyant by the way,
    With whom in combat he did fight
        Most valiantly a summer's day:
    Who yet, for all his bats of steel,
    Was forc'd the sting of death to feel.                           205

    Back o'er the seas with many bands
        Of warlike souldiers soon he past,
    Vowing upon those heathen lands
        To work revenge; which at the last,
    Ere thrice three years were gone and spent,                      210
    He wrought unto his heart's content.

    Save onely Egypt land he spar'd
        For Sabra bright her only sake,
    And, ere for her he had regard,
        He meant a tryal kind to make:                               215
    Mean while the king o'ercome in field
    Unto saint George did quickly yield.

    Then straight Morocco's king he slew,
        And took fair Sabra to his wife,
    But meant to try if she were true                                220
        Ere with her he would lead his life:
    And, tho' he had her in his train,
    She did a virgin pure remain.

    Toward England then that lovely dame
        The brave St. George conducted strait,                       225
    An eunuch also with them came,
        Who did upon the lady wait;
    These three from Egypt went alone.
    Now mark St. George's valour shown.

    When as they in a forest were,                                   230
        The lady did desire to rest;
    Mean while St. George to kill a deer,
        For their repast did think it best:
    Leaving her with the eunuch there,
    Whilst he did go to kill the deer.                               235

    But lo! all in his absence came
        Two hungry lyons fierce and fell,
    And tore the eunuch on the same
        In pieces small, the truth to tell;
    Down by the lady then they laid,                                 240
    Whereby they shew'd, she was a maid.

    But when he came from hunting back,
        And did behold this heavy chance,
    Then for his lovely virgin's sake
        His courage strait he did advance,                           245

    And came into the lions sight,
    Who ran at him with all their might.

    Their rage did him no whit dismay,
        Who, like a stout and valiant knight,
    Did both the hungry lyons slay                                   250
        Within the lady Sabra's sight:
    Who all this while sad and demure,
    There stood most like a virgin pure.

    Now when St. George did surely know
        This lady was a virgin true,                                 255
    His heart was glad, that erst was woe,
        And all his love did soon renew:
    He set her on a palfrey steed,
    And towards England came with speed.

    Where being in short space arriv'd                               260
        Unto his native dwelling-place;
    Therein with his dear love he liv'd,
        And fortune did his nuptials grace:
    They many years of joy did see,
    And led their lives at Coventry.                                 265




III.

LOVE WILL FIND OUT THE WAY.


This excellent song is ancient: but we could only give it from a modern
copy.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [Earlier editions of this spirited song are printed in Evans's _Old
  Ballads_, iii. 282 (1810), and Rimbault's _Little Book of Songs
  and Ballads_, p. 137. It is quoted in Brome's _Sparagus Garden_,
  acted in 1635, and Shirley's _Constant Maid_ was republished in
  1661, under the title of _Love will find out the Way_, by T. B.

  Dr. Rimbault has the following note in his _Musical Illustrations_,
  "The old black-letter copy of this ballad is called '_Truth's
  Integrity: or, a curious Northerne Ditty_, called _Love will
  finde out the Way_. To a pleasant new Tune Printed at London for
  F. Coules, dwelling in the Old Bailey.' There is a second part
  consisting of six stanzas, which Percy has not reprinted. The tune
  is here given (translated from the _Tablature_) from _Musicks
  Recreation on the Lyra Viol_, published by Playford in 1652. It is
  also preserved in Forbes's _Cantus_, 1662; in _Musick's Delight on
  the Cithren_, 1666; and in D'Urfey's _Pills to Purge Melancholy_,
  1719. The _Pepysian Collection_ contains several ballads to this
  tune."

  Mr. Chappell writes, "The air is still current, for in the summer
  of 1855, Mr. Jennings, Organist of All Saints' Church, Maidstone,
  noted it down from the wandering hop-pickers singing a song to it
  on their entrance into that town." _Popular Music_, vol. i. p. 304.]

       *       *       *       *       *

    Over the mountains,
        And over the waves;
    Under the fountains,
        And under the graves;
    Under the floods that are deepest,                                 5
        Which Neptune obey;
    Over rocks that are steepest,
        Love will find out the way.

    Where there is no place
        For the glow-worm to lye;                                     10
    Where there is no space
        For receipt of a fly;
    Where the midge dares not venture,
        Lest herself fast she lay;
    If love come, he will enter,                                      15
        And soon find out his way.

    You may esteem him
        A child for his might;
    Or you may deem him
        A coward from his flight;                                     20

    But if she, whom love doth honour,
        Be conceal'd from the day,
    Set a thousand guards upon her,
        Love will find out the way.

    Some think to lose him,                                           25
        By having him confin'd;
    And some do suppose him,
        Poor thing, to be blind;
    But if ne'er so close ye wall him,
        Do the best that you may,                                     30
    Blind love, if so ye call him,
        Will find out his way.

    You may train the eagle
      To stoop to your fist;
    Or you may inveigle                                               35
      The phenix of the east;
    The lioness, ye may move her
      To give o'er her prey;
    But you'll ne'er stop a lover:
      He will find out his way.

                                                          [***]




IV.

LORD THOMAS AND FAIR ANNET,


                           A SCOTTISH BALLAD,

Seems to be composed (not without improvements) out of two ancient
English ones, printed in the former part of this volume. See book i.
ballad xv. and book ii. ballad iv.--If this had been the original,
the authors of those two ballads would hardly have adopted two such
different stories: besides, this contains enlargements not to be found
in either of the others. It is given with some corrections, from a MS.
copy transmitted from Scotland.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [Jamieson prints a version of this ballad which was taken down from
  the recitation of Mrs. W. Arrot of Aberbrothick, and is entitled
  _Sweet Willie and Fair Annie_. He contends that it is "pure and
  entire," and expresses his opinion that the text of Percy's copy
  had been "adjusted" previous to its leaving Scotland.]

       *       *       *       *       *

    Lord Thomas and fair Annet
      Sate a' day on a hill;
    Whan night was cum, and sun was sett,
      They had not talkt their fill.

    Lord Thomas said a word in jest,                                   5
      Fair Annet took it ill:
    A'! I will nevir wed a wife
      Against my ain friends will.

    Gif ye wull nevir wed a wife,
      A wife wull neir wed yee.                                       10
    Sae he is hame to tell his mither,
      And knelt upon his knee:

    O rede, O rede, mither, he says,
      A gude rede gie to mee:
    O sall I tak the nut-browne bride,                                15
      And let faire Annet bee?

    The nut-browne bride haes gowd and gear,
      Fair Annet she has gat nane;
    And the little beauty fair Annet has,
      O it wull soon be gane!                                         20

    And he has till his brother gane:
      Now, brother, rede ye mee;
    A' sall I marrie the nut-browne bride,
      And let fair Annet bee?

    The nut-browne bride has oxen, brother,
      The nut-browne bride has kye;
    I wad hae ye marrie the nut-browne bride,
      And cast fair Annet bye.

    Her oxen may dye i' the house, Billìe,
      And her kye into the byre;                                      30
    And I sall hae nothing to my sell,
      Bot a fat fadge[423] by the fyre.

    And he has till his sister gane:
      Now, sister, rede ye mee;
    O sall I marrie the nut-browne bride,                             35
      And set fair Annet free?

    Ise rede ye tak fair Annet, Thomas,
      And let the browne bride alane;
    Lest ye sould sigh and say, Alace!
      What is this we brought hame?                                   40

    No, I will tak my mithers counsel,
      And marrie me owt o' hand;
    And I will tak the nut-browne bride;
      Fair Annet may leive the land.

    Up then rose fair Annets father                                   45
      Twa hours or it wer day,
    And he is gane into the bower,
      Wherein fair Annet lay.

    Rise up, rise up, fair Annet, he says,
      Put on your silken sheene;                                      50
    Let us gae to St. Maries kirke,
      And see that rich weddeen.

    My maides, gae to my dressing roome,
      And dress to me my hair;
    Whair-eir yee laid a plait before,
      See yee lay ten times mair.

    My maids, gae to my dressing room,
      And dress to me my smock;
    The one half is o' the holland fine,
      The other o' needle-work.                                       60

    The horse fair Annet rade upon,
      He amblit like the wind,
    Wi' siller he was shod before,
      Wi' burning gowd behind.

    Four and twanty siller bells                                      65
      Wer a' tyed till his mane,
    And yae tift[424] o' the norland wind,
      They tinkled ane by ane.

    Four and twanty gay gude knichts
      Rade by the fair Annets side,                                   70
    And four and twanty fair ladies,
      As gin she had bin a bride.

    And whan she cam to Maries kirk,
      She sat on Maries stean:
    The cleading that fair Annet had on                               75
      It skinkled in their een.

    And whan she cam into the kirk,
      She shimmer'd like the sun;
    The belt that was about her waist,
      Was a' wi' pearles bedone.                                      80

    She sat her by the nut-browne bride,
      And her een they wer sae clear,
    Lord Thomas he clean forgat the bride,
      Whan fair Annet she drew near.

    He had a rose into his hand,                                      95
      And he gave it kisses three,
    And reaching by the nut-browne bride,
      Laid it on fair Annets knee

    Up than spak the nut-browne bride,
      She spak wi' meikle spite;                                      90
    And whair gat ye that rose-water,
      That does mak yee sae white?

    O I did get the rose-water,
      Whair ye wull neir get nane,
    For I did get that very rose-water                                95
      Into my mithers wame.

    The bride she drew a long bodkin,
      Frae out her gay head-gear,
    And strake fair Annet unto the heart,
      That word she nevir spak mair.                                 100

    Lord Thomas he saw fair Annet wex pale,
      And marvelit what mote bee:
    But whan he saw her dear hearts blude,
      A' wood-wroth[425] wexed hee.

    He drew his dagger, that was sae sharp,                          105
      That was sae sharp and meet,
    And drave into the nut-browne bride,
      That fell deid at his feit.

    Now stay for me, dear Annet, he sed,
      Now stay, my dear, he cry'd;                                   110
    Then strake the dagger untill his heart,
      And fell deid by her side.

    Lord Thomas was buried without kirk-wa',
      Fair Annet within the quiere;
    And o' the tane thair grew a birk,                               115
      The other a bonny briere.

    And ay they grew, and ay they threw,
      As they wad faine be neare;
    And by this ye may ken right weil,
      They ware twa luvers deare.                                    120

FOOTNOTES:

[423] [bundle of sticks.]

[424] [gust of wind.]

[425] [furiously enraged.]




V.

UNFADING BEAUTY.


This little beautiful sonnet is reprinted from a small volume
of "_Poems_ by _Thomas Carew_, Esq. one of the gentlemen of the
privie-chamber, and sewer in ordinary to his majesty (Charles I.) Lond.
1640." This elegant, and almost-forgotten writer, whose poems have been
deservedly revived, died in the prime of his age, in 1639.

In the original follows a third stanza; which, not being of general
application, nor of equal merit, I have ventured to omit.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [Dr. Rimbault informs us that the original music was composed by
  Henry Lawes, and is included in his _Ayres and Dialogues for one,
  two and three Voyces_, 1653.]

       *       *       *       *       *

    Hee, that loves a rosie cheeke,
      Or a corall lip admires,
    Or from star-like eyes doth seeke
      Fuell to maintaine his fires,
    As old time makes these decay,                                     5
    So his flames must waste away.

    But a smooth and stedfast mind,
      Gentle thoughts, and calme desires,
    Hearts with equal love combin'd
      Kindle never-dying fires:                                       10
    Where these are not I despise
    Lovely cheekes, or lips, or eyes.
           *       *       *       *       *




VI.

GEORGE BARNWELL.


The subject of this ballad is sufficiently popular from the modern
play which is founded upon it. This was written by _George Lillo_, a
jeweller of London, and first acted about 1730.--As for the ballad it
was printed at least as early as the middle of the last century.

It is here given from three old printed copies, which exhibit a
strange intermixture of Roman and black letter. It is also collated
with another copy in the _Ashmole Collection_ at Oxford, which is thus
intitled, "An excellent ballad of _George Barnwell_, an apprentice of
London, who ... thrice robbed his master and murdered his uncle in
Ludlow." The tune is _The Merchant_.

This tragical narrative seems to relate a real fact; but when it
happened I have not been able to discover.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [Ritson writes as follows concerning certain improvements made
  by Percy in the following ballad (_Ancient Songs_, 1829, vol.
  ii. p. 165, note):--"Throughout this 'second part' (except in a
  single instance) the metre of the first line of each stanza is in
  the old editions lengthened by a couple of syllables, which are,
  occasionally at least, a manifest interpolation. The person also is
  for the most part changed from the first to the third, with evident
  impropriety. Dr. Percy has very ingeniously restored the measure by
  ejecting the superfluous syllables, and given consistency to the
  whole by the restoration of the proper person; and as it is now
  highly improbable that any further ancient copy will be found, and
  those which exist are manifestly corrupt, it seemed justifiable to
  adopt the judicious emendations of this ingenious editor."

  Dr. Rimbault observes, "This curious tune (_The Merchant_) which
  has been quite overlooked by antiquaries, is found, together with
  the original ballad, _The Merchant and the Fiddler's Wife_, in
  D'Urfey's _Pills to Purge Melancholy_, vol. v. p. 77, edit. 1719."

  The former great popularity of the story of the wicked young
  prentice is shown by James Smith's parody in the _Rejected
  Addresses_ and Thackeray's caricature romance--_George de
  Barnwell_.]

       *       *       *       *       *


THE FIRST PART.

    All youths of fair Englànd
      That dwell both far and near,
    Regard my story that I tell,
      And to my song give ear.

    A London lad I was,                                                5
      A merchant's prentice bound;
    My name George Barnwell; that did spend
      My master many a pound.

    Take heed of harlots then,
      And their enticing trains;                                      10
    For by that means I have been brought
      To hang alive in chains.

    As I, upon a day,
      Was walking through the street
    About my master's business,                                       15
      A wanton I did meet.

    A gallant dainty dame,
      And sumptuous in attire;
    With smiling look she greeted me,
      And did my name require.                                        20

    Which when I had declar'd,
      She gave me then a kiss,
    And said, if I would come to her,
      I should have more than this.

    Fair mistress, then quoth I,                                      25
      If I the place may know,
    This evening I will be with you,
      For I abroad must go

    To gather monies in,
      That are my master's due:                                       30
    And ere that I do home return,
      I'll come and visit you.

    Good Barnwell, then quoth she,
      Do thou to Shoreditch come,
    And ask for Mrs. Millwood's house,                                35
      Next door unto the Gun.

    And trust me on my truth,
      If thou keep touch with me,
    My dearest friend, as my own heart
      Thou shall right welcome be.                                    40

    Thus parted we in peace,
      And home I passed right;
    Then went abroad, and gathered in,
      By six o'clock at night,

    An hundred pound and one:                                         45
      With bag under my arm
    I went to Mrs. Millwood's house,
      And thought on little harm;

    And knocking at the door,
      Straightway herself came down;                                  50
    Rustling in most brave attire,
      With hood and silken gown.

    Who, through her beauty bright,
      So gloriously did shine,
    That she amaz'd my dazzling eyes,                                 55
      She seemed so divine.

    She took me by the hand,
      And with a modest grace,
    Welcome, sweet Barnwell, then quoth she,
      Unto this homely place.                                         60

    And since I have thee found
      As good as thy word to be:
    A homely supper, ere we part,
      Thou shalt take here with me.

    O pardon me, quoth I,                                             65
      Fair mistress, I you pray;
    For why, out of my master's house,
      So long I dare not stay.

    Alas, good Sir, she said,
      Are you so strictly ty'd,                                       70
    You may not with your dearest friend
      One hour or two abide?

    Faith, then the case is hard:
      If it be so, quoth she,
    I would I were a prentice bound,                                  75
      To live along with thee:

    Therefore, my dearest George,
      List well what I shall say,
    And do not blame a woman much,
      Her fancy to bewray.                                            80

    Let not affection's force
      Be counted lewd desire;
    Nor think it not immodesty,
      I should thy love require.

    With that she turn'd aside,                                       85
      And with a blushing red,
    A mournful motion she bewray'd
      By hanging down her head.

    A handkerchief she had,
      All wrought with silk and gold:                                 90
    Which she to stay her trickling tears
      Before her eyes did hold.

    This thing unto my sight
      Was wondrous rare and strange;
    And in my soul and inward thought                                 95
      It wrought a sudden change:

    That I so hardy grew,
      To take her by the hand:
    Saying, Sweet mistress, why do you
      So dull and pensive stand?                                     100

    Call me no mistress now,
      But Sarah, thy true friend,
    Thy servant, Millwood, honouring thee,
      Until her life hath end.

    If thou wouldst here alledge,                                    105
      Thou art in years a boy;
    So was Adonis, yet was he
      Fair Venus' only joy.

    Thus I, who ne'er before
      Of woman found such grace,                                     110
    But seeing now so fair a dame
      Give me a kind embrace,

    I supt with her that night,
      With joys that did abound;
    And for the same paid presently,                                 115
      In money twice three pound.

    An hundred kisses then,
      For my farewel she gave;
    Crying, Sweet Barnwell, when shall I
      Again thy company have?                                        120

    O stay not hence too long,
      Sweet George, have me in mind.
    Her words bewicht my childishness,
      She uttered them so kind:

    So that I made a vow,                                            125
      Next Sunday without fail,
    With my sweet Sarah once again
      To tell some pleasant tale.

    When she heard me say so,
      The tears fell from her eye;                                   130
    O George, quoth she, if thou dost fail,
      Thy Sarah sure will dye.

    Though long, yet loe! at last,
      The appointed day was come,
    That I must with my Sarah meet;                                  135
      Having a mighty sum

    Of money in my hand,[426]
      Unto her house went I,
    Whereas my love upon her bed
      In saddest sort did lye.                                       140

    What ails my heart's delight,
      My Sarah dear? quoth I;
    Let not my love lament and grieve,
      Nor sighing pine, and die.

    But tell me, dearest friend,                                     145
      What may thy woes amend,
    And thou shalt lack no means of help,
      Though forty pound I spend.

    With that she turn'd her head,
      And sickly thus did say,                                       150
    Oh me, sweet George, my grief is great,
      Ten pound I have to pay

    Unto a cruel wretch;
      And God he knows, quoth she,
    I have it not. Tush, rise, I said,                               155
      And take it here of me.

    Ten pounds, nor ten times ten,
      Shall make my love decay.
    Then from my bag into her lap,
      I cast ten pound straightway.                                  160

    All blithe and pleasant then,
      To banqueting we go;
    She proffered me to lye with her,
      And said it should be so.

    And after that same time,                                        165
      I gave her store of coyn,
    Yea, sometimes fifty pound at once;
      All which I did purloyn.

    And thus I did pass on;
      Until my master then                                           170
    Did call to have his reckoning in
      Cast up among his men.

    The which when as I heard,
      I knew not what to say:
    For well I knew that I was out                                   175
      Two hundred pound that day.

    Then from my master straight
      I ran in secret sort;
    And unto Sarah Millwood there
      My case I did report.                                          180

    "But how she us'd this youth,
      In this his care and woe,
    And all a strumpet's wiley ways,
      The SECOND PART may showe."

       *       *       *       *       *


THE SECOND PART.

    Young Barnwell comes to thee,
      Sweet Sarah, my delight;
    I am undone unless thou stand
      My faithful friend this night.

    Our master to accompts,                                            5
      Hath just occasion found;
    And I am caught behind the hand,
      Above two hundred pound:

    And now his wrath to 'scape,
      My love, I fly to thee,                                         10
    Hoping some time I may remaine
      In safety here with thee.

    With that she knit her brows,
      And looking all aquoy,[427]
    Quoth she, What should I have to do                               15
      With any prentice boy?

    And seeing you have purloyn'd
      Your master's goods away,
    The case is bad, and therefore here
      You shall no longer stay.                                       20

    Why, dear, thou knowst, I said,
      How all which I could get,
    I gave it, and did spend it all
      Upon thee every whit.

    Quoth she, Thou art a knave,                                      25
      To charge me in this sort,
    Being a woman of credit fair,
      And known of good report:

    Therefore I tell thee flat,
      Be packing with good speed;                                     30
    I do defie thee from my heart,
      And scorn thy filthy deed.

    Is this the friendship, that
      You did to me protest?
    Is this the great affection, which                                35
      You so to me exprest?

    Now fie on subtle shrews!
      The best is, I may speed
    To get a lodging any where,
      For money in my need.                                           40

    False woman, now farewell,
      Whilst twenty pound doth last,
    My anchor in some other haven
      With freedom I will cast.

    When she perceiv'd by this,                                       45
      I had store of money there:
    Stay, George, quoth she, thou art too quick:
      Why, man, I did but jeer:

    Dost think for all my speech,
      That I would let thee go?                                       50
    Faith no, said she, my love to thee
      I wiss is more than so.

    You scorne a prentice boy,
      I heard you just now swear,
    Wherefore I will not trouble you.----                             55
      ----Nay, George, hark in thine ear;

    Thou shalt not go to-night,
      What chance so e're befall:
    But man we'll have a bed for thee,
      O else the devil take all.                                      60

    So I by wiles bewitcht,
      And snar'd with fancy still,
    Had then no power to 'get' away,
      Or to withstand her will.

    For wine on wine I call'd,                                        65
      And cheer upon good cheer;
    And nothing in the world I thought
      For Sarah's love too dear.

    Whilst in her company,
      I had such merriment;                                           70
    All, all too little I did think,
      That I upon her spent.

    A fig for care and thought!
      When all my gold is gone,
    In faith, my girl, we will have more,                             75
      Whoever I light upon.

    My father's rich, why then
      Should I want store of gold?
    Nay with a father sure, quoth she,
      A son may well make bold.                                       80

    I've a sister richly wed,
      I'll rob her ere I'll want.
    Nay, then quoth Sarah, they may well
      Consider of your scant.

    Nay, I an uncle have;                                             85
      At Ludlow he doth dwell:
    He is a grazier, which in wealth
      Doth all the rest excell.

    Ere I will live in lack,
      And have no coyn for thee:                                      90
    I'll rob his house, and murder him,
      Why should you not? quoth she:

    Was I a man, ere I
      Would live in poor estate;
    On father, friends, and all my kin,                               95
      I would my talons grate.

    For without money, George,
      A man is but a beast:
    But bringing money, thou shalt be
      Always my welcome guest.                                       100

    For shouldst thou be pursued
      With twenty hues and cryes,
    And with a warrant searched for
      With Argus' hundred eyes,

    Yet here thou shalt be safe;                                     105
      Such privy ways there be,
    That if they sought an hundred years,
      They could not find out thee.

    And so carousing both
      Their pleasures to content:                                    110
    George Barnwell had in little space
      His money wholly spent.

    Which done, to Ludlow straight
      He did provide to go,
    To rob his wealthy uncle there;                                  115
      His minion would it so.

    And once he thought to take
      His father by the way,
    But that he fear'd his master had
      Took order for his stay[428].                                  120

    Unto his uncle then
      He rode with might and main,
    Who with a welcome and good cheer,
      Did Barnwell entertain.

    One fortnight's space he stayed,                                 125
      Until it chanced so,
    His uncle with his cattle did
      Unto a market go.

    His kinsman rode with him,
      Where he did see right plain,                                  130
    Great store of money he had took:
      When coming home again,

    Sudden within a wood,
      He struck his uncle down,
    And beat his brains out of his head;                             135
      So sore he crackt his crown.

    Then seizing fourscore pound,
      To London straight he hyed,
    And unto Sarah Millwood all
      The cruell fact descryed.                                      140

    Tush,'tis no matter, George,
      So we the money have
    To have good cheer in jolly sort,
      And deck us fine and brave.

    Thus lived in filthy sort,                                       145
      Until their store was gone:
    When means to get them any more,
      I wis, poor George, had none.

    Therefore in railing sort,
      She thrust him out of door:                                    150
    Which is the just reward of those,
      Who spend upon a whore.

    O! do me not disgrace
      In this my need, quoth he
    She call'd him thief and murderer,                               155
      With all the spight might be:

    To the constable she sent,
      To have him apprehended;
    And shewed how far, in each degree,
      He had the laws offended.                                      160

    When Barnwell saw her drift,
      To sea he got straightway;
    Where fear and sting of conscience
      Continually on him lay.

    Unto the lord mayor then,                                        165
      He did a letter write;
    In which his own and Sarah's fault
      He did at large recite.

    Whereby she seized was,
      And then to Ludlow sent:                                       170
    Where she was judg'd, condemn'd, and hang'd,
      For murder incontinent.

    There dyed this gallant quean,
      Such was her greatest gains:
    For murder in Polonia,                                           175
      Was Barnwell hang'd in chains.

    Lo! here's the end of youth,
      That after harlots haunt;
    Who in the spoil of other men,
      About the streets do flaunt.                                   180

FOOTNOTES:

[426] The having a sum of money with him on Sunday, &c. shews this
narrative to have been penned before the civil wars: the strict
observance of the sabbath was owing to the change of manners at that
period.

[427] [coy, shy.]

[428] _i.e._ for stopping, and apprehending him at his father's.




VII.

THE STEDFAST SHEPHERD.


These beautiful stanzas were written by _George Wither_, of whom some
account was given in the former part of this volume; see the song
intitled, _The Shepherd's Resolution_, book ii. song xxi. In the
first edition of this work only a small fragment of this sonnet was
inserted. It was afterwards rendered more compleat and intire by the
addition of five stanzas more, extracted from Wither's pastoral poem,
intitled, _The Mistress of Philarete_, of which this song makes a part.
It is now given still more correct and perfect by comparing it with
another copy, printed by the author in his improved edition of _The
Shepherd's Hunting_, 1620, 8vo.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [The Folio MS. (ed. Hales and Furnivall, vol. iii. p. 360) contains
  only the fifth and sixth stanzas slightly varied, which were
  printed in the first edition of the _Reliques_, with the title of
  _The Aspiring Shepherd_.]

       *       *       *       *       *

    Hence away, thou Syren, leave me,
        Pish! unclaspe these wanton armes;
    Sugred words can ne'er deceive me,
        (Though thou prove a thousand charmes).
          Fie, fie, forbeare;                                          5
          No common snare
        Can ever my affection chaine:
          Thy painted baits,
          And poore deceits,
        Are all bestowed on me in vaine.                              10

    I'me no slave to such, as you be;
        Neither shall that snowy brest,
    Rowling eye, and lip of ruby
        Ever robb me of my rest:

          Goe, go display                                             15
          Thy beautie's ray
        To some more soone-enamour'd swaine;
          Those common wiles
          Of sighs and smiles
        Are all bestowed on me in vaine.                              20

    I have elsewhere vowed a dutie;
        Turne away thy tempting eye:
    Shew not me a painted beautie;
        These impostures I defie:
          My spirit lothes                                            25
          Where gawdy clothes
      And fained othes may love obtaine:
          I love her so,
          Whose looke sweares No;
      That all your labours will be vaine.                            30

    Can he prize the tainted posies,
        Which on every brest are worne;
    That may plucke the virgin roses
        From their never-touched thorne?
          I can goe rest                                              35
          On her sweet brest,
      That is the pride of Cynthia's traine:
          Then stay thy tongue;
          Thy mermaid song
      Is all bestowed on me in vaine.                                 40

    Hee's a foole, that basely dallies,
        Where each peasant mates with him:
    Shall I haunt the thronged vallies,
        Whilst ther's noble hills to climbe?
          No, no, though clownes                                      45
          Are scar'd with frownes,
      I know the best can but disdaine;
          And those Ile prove:
          So will thy love
      Be all bestowed on me in vaine.                                 50

    I doe scorne to vow a dutie,
        Where each lustfull lad may wooe:
    Give me her, whose sun-like beautie
        Buzzards dare not soar unto:
          Shee, shee it is                                            55
          Affoords that blisse
        For which I would refuse no paine:
          But such as you,
          Fond fooles, adieu;
        You seeke to captive me in vaine.                             60

    Leave me then, you Syrens, leave me;
        Seeke no more to worke my harmes:
    Craftie wiles cannot deceive me,
        Who am proofe against your charmes:
          You labour may                                              65
          To lead astray
        The heart, that constant shall remaine:
          And I the while
          Will sit and smile
        To see you spend your time in vaine.                          70




VIII.

THE SPANISH VIRGIN, OR EFFECTS OF JEALOUSY.


The subject of this ballad is taken from a folio collection of tragical
stories, intitled, _The theatre of God's judgments_, by Dr. Beard and
Dr. Taylor, 1642. Pt. ii. p. 89.--The text is given (with corrections)
from two copies; one of them in black-letter in the Pepys collection.
In this every stanza is accompanied with the following distich by way
of burden:

    "Oh jealousie! thou art nurst in hell:
    Depart from hence, and therein dwell."

       *       *       *       *       *

    All tender hearts, that ake to hear
      Of those that suffer wrong;
    All you, that never shed a tear,
      Give heed unto my song.

    Fair Isabella's tragedy                                            5
      My tale doth far exceed:
    Alas! that so much cruelty
      In female hearts should breed!

    In Spain a lady liv'd of late,
      Who was of high degree;                                         10
    Whose wayward temper did create
      Much woe and misery.

    Strange jealousies so fill'd her head
      With many a vain surmize,
    She thought her lord had wrong'd her bed,                         15
      And did her love despise.

    A gentlewoman passing fair
      Did on this lady wait;
    With bravest dames she might compare;
      Her beauty was compleat.                                        20

    Her lady cast a jealous eye
      Upon this gentle maid;
    And taxt her with disloyaltye;
      And did her oft upbraid.

    In silence still this maiden meek                                 25
      Her bitter taunts would bear,
    While oft adown her lovely cheek
      Would steal the falling tear.

    In vain in humble sort she strove
      Her fury to disarm;                                             30
    As well the meekness of the dove
      The bloody hawke might charm.

    Her lord of humour light and gay,
      And innocent the while,
    As oft as she came in his way,                                    35
      Would on the damsell smile.

    And oft before his lady's face,
      As thinking her her friend,
    He would the maiden's modest grace
      And comeliness commend.                                         40

    All which incens'd his lady so
      She burnt with wrath extreame;
    At length the fire that long did glow,
      Burst forth into a flame.

    For on a day it so befell,                                        45
      When he was gone from home,
    The lady all with rage did swell,
      And to the damsell come.

    And charging her with great offence,
      And many a grievous fault;                                      50
    She bade her servants drag her thence,
      Into a dismal vault,

    That lay beneath the common-shore:
      A dungeon dark and deep:
    Where they were wont, in days of yore,                            55
      Offenders great to keep.

    There never light of chearful day
      Dispers'd the hideous gloom;
    But dank and noisome vapours play
      Around the wretched room:                                       60

    And adders, snakes, and toads therein,
      As afterwards was known,
    Long in this loathsome vault had bin,
      And were to monsters grown.

    Into this foul and fearful place,                                 65
      The fair one innocent
    Was cast, before her lady's face;
      Her malice to content.

    This maid no sooner enter'd is,
      But strait, alas! she hears                                     70
    The toads to croak, and snakes to hiss:
      Then grievously she fears.

    Soon from their holes the vipers creep,
      And fiercely her assail:
    Which makes the damsel sorely weep,                               75
      And her sad fate bewail.

    With her fair hands she strives in vain
      Her body to defend:
    With shrieks and cries she doth complain,
      But all is to no end.                                           80

    A servant listning near the door,
      Struck with her doleful noise,
    Strait ran his lady to implore;
      But she'll not hear his voice.

    With bleeding heart he goes agen                                  85
      To mark the maiden's groans;
    And plainly hears, within the den,
      How she herself bemoans.

    Again he to his lady hies
      With all the haste he may:                                      90
    She into furious passion flies,
      And orders him away.

    Still back again does he return
      To hear her tender cries;
    The virgin now had ceas'd to mourn;                               95
      Which fill'd him with surprize.

    In grief, and horror, and affright,
      He listens at the walls;
    But finding all was silent quite,
      He to his lady calls.                                          100

    Too sure, O lady, now quoth he,
      Your cruelty hath sped;
    Make hast, for shame, and come and see;
      I fear the virgin's dead.

    She starts to hear her sudden fate,                              105
      And does with torches run:
    But all her haste was now too late,
      For death his worst had done.

    The door being open'd strait they found
      The virgin stretch'd along:                                    110
    Two dreadful snakes had wrapt her round,
      Which her to death had stung.

    One round her legs, her thighs, her waist
      Had twin'd his fatal wreath:
    The other close her neck embrac'd,                               115
      And stopt her gentle breath.

    The snakes, being from her body thrust,
      Their bellies were so fill'd,
    That with excess of blood they burst,
      Thus with their prey were kill'd.                              120

    The wicked lady at this sight,
      With horror strait ran mad;
    So raving dy'd, as was most right,
      'Cause she no pity had.

    Let me advise you, ladies all,                                   125
      Of jealousy beware:
    It causeth many a one to fall,
      And is the devil's snare.

                                                    [***]




IX.

JEALOUSY TYRANT OF THE MIND.


This Song is by _Dryden_, being inserted in his Tragi-Comedy of _Love
Triumphant_, &c.--On account of the subject it is inserted here.

       *       *       *       *       *

    What state of life can be so blest,
    As love that warms the gentle brest;
    Two souls in one; the same desire
    To grant the bliss, and to require?
      If in this heaven a hell we find,                                5
          Tis all from thee,
          O Jealousie!
      Thou tyrant, tyrant of the mind.

    All other ills, though sharp they prove,
    Serve to refine and perfect love:                                 10
    In absence, or unkind disdaine,
    Sweet hope relieves the lovers paine:
      But, oh, no cure but death we find
          To sett us free
          From jealousie,                                             15
      Thou tyrant, tyrant of the mind.

    False in thy glass all objects are,
    Some sett too near, and some too far:
    Thou art the fire of endless night,
    The fire that burns, and gives no light.                          20
      All torments of the damn'd we find
          In only thee,
          O Jealousie;
      Thou tyrant, tyrant of the mind.




X.

CONSTANT PENELOPE.


The ladies are indebted for the following notable documents to the
Pepys collection, where the original is preserved in black-letter, and
is intitled, _A lookingglass for ladies, or a mirrour for married
women_. Tune _Queen Dido, or Troy town_.

       *       *       *       *       *

    When Greeks and Trojans fell at strife,
      And lords in armour bright were seen;
    When many a gallant lost his life
      About fair Hellen, beauty's queen;
    Ulysses, general so free,                                          5
    Did leave his dear Penelope.

    When she this wofull news did hear,
      That he would to the warrs of Troy;
    For grief she shed full many a tear,
      At parting from her only joy;                                   10
    Her ladies all about her came,
    To comfort up this Grecian dame.

    Ulysses, with a heavy heart,
      Unto her then did mildly say,
    The time is come that we must part;                               15
      My honour calls me hence away;
    Yet in my absence, dearest, be
    My constant wife, Penelope.

    Let me no longer live, she sayd,
      Then to my lord I true remain;                                  20
    My honour shall not be betray'd
      Until I see my love again;
    For I will ever constant prove,
    As is the loyal turtle-dove.

    Thus did they part with heavy chear,                              25
      And to the ships his way he took;
    Her tender eyes dropt many a tear;
      Still casting many a longing look:
    She saw him on the surges glide,
    And unto Neptune thus she cry'd:                                  30

    Thou god, whose power is in the deep,
      And rulest in the ocean main,
    My loving lord in safety keep
      Till he return to me again:
    That I his person may behold,                                     35
    To me more precious far than gold.

    Then straight the ships with nimble sails
      Were all convey'd out of her sight:
    Her cruel fate she then bewails,
      Since she had lost her hearts delight.                          40
    Now shall my practice be, quoth she,
    True vertue and humility.

    My patience I will put in ure,[429]
      My charity I will extend;
    Since for my woe there is no cure,                                45
      The helpless now I will befriend:
    The widow and the fatherless
    I will relieve, when in distress.

    Thus she continued year by year
      In doing good to every one;                                     50
    Her fame was noised every where,
      To young and old the same was known,
    That she no company would mind,
    Who were to vanity inclin'd.

    Mean while Ulysses fought for fame,                               55
      'Mongst Trojans hazarding his life:
    Young gallants, hearing of her name,
      Came flocking for to tempt his wife:
    For she was lovely, young, and fair,
    No lady might with her compare.                                   60

    With costly gifts and jewels fine,
      They did endeavour her to win;
    With banquets and the choicest wine,
      For to allure her unto sin:
    Most persons were of high degree,                                 65
    Who courted fair Penelope.

    With modesty and comely grace,
      Their wanton suits she did denye;
    No tempting charms could e'er deface
      Her dearest husband's memorye;                                  70
    But constant she would still remain,
    Hopeing to see him once again.

    Her book her dayly comfort was,
      And that she often did peruse;
    She seldom looked in her glass;                                   75
      Powder and paint she ne'er would use.
    I wish all ladies were as free
    From pride, as was Penelope.

    She in her needle took delight,
      And likewise in her spinning-wheel;                             80
    Her maids about her every night
      Did use the distaff, and the reel:
    The spiders, that on rafters twine,
    Scarce spin a thread more soft and fine.

    Sometimes she would bewail the loss                               85
      And absence of her dearest love:
    Sometimes she thought the seas to cross,
      Her fortune on the waves to prove.

    I fear my lord is slain, quoth she,
    He stays so from Penelope.                                        90

    At length the ten years siege of Troy
      Did end: in flames the city burn'd;
    And to the Grecians was great joy,
      To see the towers to ashes turn'd:
    Then came Ulysses home to see                                     95
    His constant, dear, Penelope.

    O blame her not if she was glad,
      When she her lord again had seen.
    Thrice-welcome home, my dear, she said,
      A long time absent thou hast been:                             100
    The wars shall never more deprive
    Me of my lord whilst I'm alive.

    Fair ladies all example take;
      And hence a worthy lesson learn,
    All youthful follies to forsake,                                 105
      And vice from virtue to discern:
    And let all women strive to be,
    As constant as Penelope.

FOOTNOTES:

[429] [use.]




XI.

TO LUCASTA, ON GOING TO THE WARS.


By Col. Richard Lovelace: from the volume of his poems, intitled
_Lucasta_, (Lond. 1649. 12mo.). The elegance of this writer's manner
would be more admired, if it had somewhat more of simplicity.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [Percy's admirers would be glad to expunge the above unjust
  judgment. Some of Lovelace's poems may be affected, but that charge
  cannot be brought against these exquisite verses, the last two of
  which have become a world-famed quotation.]

       *       *       *       *       *

    Tell me not, sweet, I am unkinde,
      That from the nunnerie
    Of thy chaste breast and quiet minde,
      To warre and armes I flie.

    True, a new mistresse now I chase,                                 5
      The first foe in the field;
    And with a stronger faith imbrace
      A sword, a horse, a shield.

    Yet this inconstancy is such,
      As you too shall adore;                                         10
    I could not love thee, deare, so much,
      Lov'd I not honour more.




XII.

VALENTINE AND URSINE.


The old story-book of _Valentine and Orson_ (which suggested the plan
of this tale, but it is not strictly followed in it) was originally a
translation from the French, being one of their earliest attempts at
romance. See _Le Bibliothèque de Romans, &c._

The circumstance of the bridge of bells is taken from the old metrical
legend of Sir Bevis, and has also been copied in the _Seven Champions_.
The original lines are,

    "Over the dyke a bridge there lay,
    That man and beest might passe away:
    Under the brydge were sixty belles;
    Right as the Romans telles;
    That there might no man passe in,
    But all they rang with a gyn."

                                                           Sign. E. iv.

In the Editor's folio MS. was an old poem on this subject, in a
wretched corrupt state, unworthy the press: from which were taken such
particulars as could be adopted.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [The poem entitled _The Emperour and the Childe_ in the Folio MS.
  (ed. Hales and Furnivall, vol. ii. p. 390) only suggested the
  subject of the present ballad. It commences--

    Within the Grecyan land some time did dwell
    an Emperour, whose name did ffar excell;
    he tooke to wiffe the lady B[e]llefaunt,
    the only sister to the kinge of ffrance,
    with whome he liued in pleasure and delight
    vntill that ffortune came to worke them spighte.

  There are no particular signs of "corruption," and the piece is
  probably superior to Percy's own effusion.

  Percy's trumpery commencement is an echo of the beginning of the
  printed copies of _Sir Andrew Barton_.

  The name Ursine, like that of Orson, is derived from Fr. _Ourson_,
  the diminutive of _Ours_, a bear (Latin, _ursus_.)]

       *       *       *       *       *

                            PART THE FIRST.

    Then Flora 'gins to decke the fields
      With colours fresh and fine,
    Then holy clerkes their mattins sing
      To good Saint Valentine!

    The king of France that morning fair                               5
      He would a hunting ride:
    To Artois forest prancing forth
      In all his princelye pride.

    To grace his sports a courtly train
      Of gallant peers attend;                                        10
    And with their loud and cheerful cryes
      The hills and valleys rend.

    Through the deep forest swift they pass,
      Through woods and thickets wild;
    When down within a lonely dell                                    15
      They found a new-born child;

    All in a scarlet kercher lay'd
      Of silk so fine and thin:
    A golden mantle wrapt him round
      Pinn'd with a silver pin.                                       20

    The sudden sight surpriz'd them all;
      The courtiers gather'd round;
    They look, they call, the mother seek;
      No mother could be found.

    At length the king himself drew near,                             25
      And as he gazing stands,
    The pretty babe look'd up and smil'd,
      And stretch'd his little hands.

    Now, by the rood, king Pepin says,
      This child is passing fair:                                     30
    I wot he is of gentle blood;
      Perhaps some prince's heir.

    Goe bear him home unto my court
      With all the care ye may:
    Let him be christen'd Valentine,                                  35
      In honour of this day:

    And look me out some cunning nurse;
      Well nurtur'd let him bee;
    Nor ought be wanting that becomes
      A bairn of high degree.                                         40

    They look'd him out a cunning nurse;
      And nurtur'd well was hee;
    Nor ought was wanting that became
      A bairn of high degree.

    Thus grewe the little Valentine                                   45
      Belov'd of king and peers;
    And shew'd in all he spake or did
      A wit beyond his years.

    But chief in gallant feates of arms
      He did himself advance,                                         50
    That ere he grewe to man's estate
      He had no peere in France.

    And now the early downe began
      To shade his youthful chin;
    When Valentine was dubb'd a knight,                               55
      That he might glory win.

    A boon, a boon, my gracious liege,
      I beg a boon of thee!
    The first adventure, that befalls,
      May be reserv'd for mee.                                        60

    The first adventure shall be thine;
      The king did smiling say.
    Nor many days, when lo! there came
      Three palmers clad in graye.

    Help, gracious lord, they weeping say'd;                          65
      And knelt, as it was meet:
    From Artoys forest we be come,
      With weak and wearye feet.

    Within those deep and drearye woods
      There wends a savage boy;                                       70
    Whose fierce and mortal rage doth yield
      Thy subjects dire annoy.

    'Mong ruthless beares he sure was bred;
      He lurks within their den:
    With beares he lives; with beares he feeds;                       75
      And drinks the blood of men.

    To more than savage strength he joins
      A more than human skill:
    For arms, ne cunning may suffice
      His cruel rage to still:

    Up then rose sir Valentine,
      And claim'd that arduous deed.
    Go forth and conquer, say'd the king,
      And great shall be thy meed.

    Well mounted on a milk-white steed,                               85
      His armour white as snow;
    As well beseem'd a virgin knight,
      Who ne'er had fought a foe;

    To Artoys forest he repairs
      With all the haste he may;                                      90
    And soon he spies the savage youth
      A rending of his prey.

    His unkempt hair all matted hung
      His shaggy shoulders round:
    His eager eye all fiery glow'd:                                   95
      His face with fury frown'd.

    Like eagles' talons grew his nails:
      His limbs were thick and strong;
    And dreadful was the knotted oak
      He bare with him along.                                        100

    Soon as sir Valentine approach'd,
      He starts with sudden spring;
    And yelling forth a hideous howl,
      He made the forests ring.

    As when a tyger fierce and fell                                  105
      Hath spyed a passing roe,
    And leaps at once upon his throat;
      So sprung the savage foe;

    So lightly leap'd with furious force
      The gentle knight to seize:                                    110
    But met his tall uplifted spear,
      Which sunk him on his knees.

    A second stroke so stiff and stern
      Had laid the savage low;
    But springing up, he rais'd his club,                            115
      And aim'd a dreadful blow.

    The watchful warrior bent his head,
      And shun'd the coming stroke;
    Upon his taper spear it fell,
      And all to shivers broke.                                      120

    Then lighting nimbly from his steed,
      He drew his burnisht brand:
    The savage quick as lightning flew
      To wrest it from his hand.

    Three times he grasp'd the silver hilt;                          125
      Three times he felt the blade;
    Three times it fell with furious force;
      Three ghastly wounds it made.

    Now with redoubled rage he roared;
      His eye-ball flash'd with fire;                                130
    Each hairy limb with fury shook;
      And all his heart was ire.

    Then closing fast with furious gripe
      He clasp'd the champion round,
    And with a strong and sudden twist                               135
      He laid him on the ground.

    But soon the knight, with active spring,
      O'erturn'd his hairy foe:
    And now between their sturdy fists
      Past many a bruising blow.                                     140

    They roll'd and grappled on the ground,
      And there they struggled long:
    Skilful and active was the knight;
      The savage he was strong.

    But brutal force and savage strength                             145
      To art and skill must yield:
    Sir Valentine at length prevail'd,
      And won the well-fought field.

    Then binding strait his conquer'd foe
      Fast with an iron chain,                                       150
    He tyes him to his horse's tail,
      And leads him o'er the plain.

    To court his hairy captive soon
      Sir Valentine doth bring;
    And kneeling downe upon his knee,                                155
      Presents him to the king.

    With loss of blood and loss of strength,
      The savage tamer grew;
    And to sir Valentine became
      A servant try'd and true.                                      160

    And 'cause with beares he erst was bred,
      Ursine they call his name;
    A name which unto future times
      The Muses shall proclame.

       *       *       *       *       *


PART THE SECOND.

    In high renown with prince and peere
      Now liv'd sir Valentine:
    His high renown with prince and peere
      Made envious hearts repine.

    It chanc'd the king upon a day                                     5
      Prepar'd a sumptuous feast:
    And there came lords, and dainty dames,
      And many a noble guest.

    Amid their cups, that freely flow'd,
      Their revelry, and mirth;                                       10
    A youthful knight tax'd Valentine
      Of base and doubtful birth.

    The foul reproach, so grossly urg'd,
      His generous heart did wound:
    And strait he vow'd he ne'er would rest                           15
      Till he his parents found.

    Then bidding king and peers adieu,
      Early one summer's day,
    With faithful Ursine by his side,
      From court he took his way.                                     20

    O'er hill and valley, moss and moor,
      For many a day they pass;
    At length upon a moated lake,[430]
      They found a bridge of brass.

    Beyond it rose a castle fair                                      25
      Y-built of marble stone:
    The battlements were gilt with gold,
      And glittred in the sun.

    Beneath the bridge, with strange device,
      A hundred bells were hung;                                      30
    That man, nor beast, might pass thereon,
      But strait their larum rung.

    This quickly found the youthful pair,
      Who boldly crossing o'er,
    The jangling sound bedeaft their ears,                            35
      And rung from shore to shore.

    Quick at the sound the castle gates
      Unlock'd and opened wide,
    And strait a gyant huge and grim
      Stalk'd forth with stately pride.                               40

    Now yield you, caytiffs, to my will;
      He cried with hideous roar;
    Or else the wolves shall eat your flesh,
      And ravens drink your gore.

    Vain boaster, said the youthful knight,                           45
      I scorn thy threats and thee:
    I trust to force thy brazen gates,
      And set thy captives free.

    Then putting spurs unto his steed,
      He aim'd a dreadful thrust:                                     50
    The spear against the gyant glanc'd,
      And caus'd the blood to burst.

    Mad and outrageous with the pain,
      He whirl'd his mace of steel:
    The very wind of such a blow                                      55
      Had made the champion reel.

    It haply mist; and now the knight
      His glittering sword display'd,
    And riding round with whirlwind speed
      Oft made him feel the blade.                                    60

    As when a large and monstrous oak
      Unceasing axes hew:
    So fast around the gyant's limbs
      The blows quick-darting flew.

    As when the boughs with hideous fall                              65
      Some hapless woodman crush:
    With such a force the enormous foe
      Did on the champion rush.

    A fearful blow, alas! there came,
      Both horse and knight it took.                                  70
    And laid them senseless in the dust;
      So fatal was the stroke.

    Then smiling forth a hideous grin,
      The gyant strides in haste,
    And, stooping, aims a second stroke:                              75
      "Now caytiff breathe thy last!"

    But ere it fell, two thundering blows
      Upon his scull descend:
    From Ursine's knotty club they came,
      Who ran to save his friend.                                     80

    Down sunk the gyant gaping wide,
      And rolling his grim eyes:
    The hairy youth repeats his blows:
      He gasps, he groans, he dies.

    Quickly sir Valentine reviv'd                                     85
      With Ursine's timely care:
    And now to search the castle walls
      The venturous youths repair.

    The blood and bones of murder'd knights
      They found where'er they came:                                  90
    At length within a lonely cell
      They saw a mournful dame.

    Her gentle eyes were dim'd with tears;
      Her cheeks were pale with woe:
    And long sir Valentine besought                                   95
      Her doleful tale to know.

    "Alas! young knight," she weeping said,
      "Condole my wretched fate:
    A childless mother here you see;
      A wife without a mate.                                         100

    "These twenty winters here forlorn
      I've drawn my hated breath;
    Sole witness of a monster's crimes,
      And wishing aye for death.

    "Know, I am sister of a king;                                    105
      And in my early years
    Was married to a mighty prince,
      The fairest of his peers.

    "With him I sweetly liv'd in love
    A twelvemonth and a day:                                         110
      When, lo! a foul and treacherous priest
    Y-wrought our loves' decay.

    "His seeming goodness wan him pow'r;
      He had his master's ear:
    And long to me and all the world                                 115
      He did a saint appear.

    "One day, when we were all alone,
      He proffer'd odious love:
    The wretch with horrour I repuls'd,
      And from my presence drove.                                    120

    "He feign'd remorse, and piteous beg'd
      His crime I'd not reveal:
    Which, for his seeming penitence,
      I promis'd to conceal.

    "With treason, villainy, and wrong                               125
      My goodness he repay'd:
    With jealous doubts he fill'd my lord,
      And me to woe betray'd.

    "He hid a slave within my bed,
      Then rais'd a bitter cry.                                      130
    My lord, possest with rage, condemn'd
      Me, all unheard, to dye.

    "But 'cause I then was great with child,
      At length my life he spar'd;
    But bade me instant quit the realme,                             135
      One trusty knight my guard.

    "Forth on my journey I depart,
      Opprest with grief and woe;
    And tow'rds my brother's distant court,
      With breaking heart, I goe.                                    140

    "Long time thro' sundry foreign lands
      We slowly pace along:
    At length within a forest wild
      I fell in labour strong:

    "And while the knight for succour sought,                        145
      And left me there forlorn,
    My childbed pains so fast increast
      Two lovely boys were born.

    "The eldest fair, and smooth, as snow
      That tips the mountain hoar:                                   150
    The younger's little body rough
      With hairs was cover'd o'er.

    "But here afresh begin my woes:
      While tender care I took
    To shield my eldest from the cold,                               155
      And wrap him in my cloak;

    "A prowling bear burst from the wood,
      And seiz'd my younger son:
    Affection lent my weakness wings,
      And after them I run.                                          160

    "But all forewearied, weak and spent,
      I quickly swoon'd away;
    And there beneath the greenwood shade
      Long time I lifeless lay.

    "At length the knight brought me relief,                         165
      And rais'd me from the ground:
    But neither of my pretty babes
      Could ever more be found.

    "And, while in search we wander'd far,
      We met that gyant grim;                                        170
    Who ruthless slew my trusty knight,
      And bare me off with him.

    "But charm'd by heav'n, or else my griefs,
      He offer'd me no wrong;
    Save that within these lonely walls                              175
      I've been immur'd so long."

    Now, surely, said the youthful knight,
      You are lady Bellisance,
    Wife to the Grecian emperor:
      Your brother's king of France.                                 180

    For in your royal brother's court
      Myself my breeding had;
    Where oft the story of your woes
      Hath made my bosom sad.

    If so, know your accuser's dead,                                 185
      And dying own'd his crime;
    And long your lord hath sought you out
      Thro' every foreign clime.

    And when no tidings he could learn
      Of his much-wronged wife,                                      190
    He vow'd thenceforth within his court
      To lead a hermit's life.

    Now heaven is kind! the lady said;
      And dropt a joyful tear:
    Shall I once more behold my lord?                                195
      That lord I love so dear?

    But, madam, said sir Valentine,
      And knelt upon his knee;
    Know you the cloak that wrapt your babe,
      If you the same should see?                                    200

    And pulling forth the cloth of gold,
      In which himself was found;
    The lady gave a sudden shriek,
      And fainted on the ground.

    But by his pious care reviv'd,                                   205
      His tale she heard anon;
    And soon by other tokens found,
      He was indeed her son.

    But who's this hairy youth? she said;
      He much resembles thee:                                        210
    The bear devour'd my younger son,
      Or sure that son were he.

    Madam, this youth with bears was bred,
      And rear'd within their den.
    But recollect ye any mark                                        215
      To know you son agen?

    Upon his little side, quoth she,
      Was stampt a bloody rose.
    Here, lady, see the crimson mark
      Upon his body grows!                                           220

    Then clasping both her new-found sons
      She bath'd their cheeks with tears;
    And soon towards hèr brother's court
      Her joyful course she steers.

    What pen can paint king Pepin's joy,                             225
      His sister thus restor'd!
    And soon a messenger was sent
      To cheer her drooping lord:

    Who came in haste with all his peers,
      To fetch her home to Greece;                                   230
    Where many happy years they reign'd
      In perfect love and peace.

    To them sir Ursine did succeed,
      And long the scepter bare.
    Sir Valentine he stay'd in France,                               235
      And was his uncle's heir.

                                                 [***]

FOOTNOTES:

[430] Ver. 23. _i.e._ a lake that served for a moat to a castle.




XIII.

THE DRAGON OF WANTLEY.


This humourous song (as a former Editor[431] has well observed) is to
old metrical romances and ballads of chivalry, what _Don Quixote_ is to
prose narratives of that kind:--a lively satire on their extravagant
fictions. But altho' the satire is thus general, the subject of this
ballad is local and peculiar: so that many of the finest strokes of
humour are lost for want of our knowing the minute circumstances to
which they allude. Many of them can hardly now be recovered, altho' we
have been fortunate enough to learn the general subject to which the
satire referred, and shall detail the information, with which we have
been favoured, at the end of this introduction.

In handling his subject, the Author has brought in most of the
common incidents which occur in romance. The description of the
dragon[432]--his outrages--the people flying to the knight for
succour--his care in chusing his armour--his being drest for fight by a
young damsel--and most of the circumstances of the battle and victory
(allowing for the burlesque turn given to them) are what occur in every
book of chivalry, whether in prose or verse.

If any one piece, more than other, is more particularly levelled at,
it seems to be the old rhiming legend of sir Bevis. There a _Dragon_
is attacked from a _Well_ in a manner not very remote from this of the
ballad:--

    There was a well, so have I wynne,
    And Bevis stumbled ryght therein.
           *       *       *       *       *
    Than was he glad without fayle,
    And rested a whyle for his avayle;
    And dranke of that water his fyll;
    And then he lepte out, with good wyll,
    And with Morglay his brande
    He assayled the dragon, I understande:
    On the dragon he smote so faste,
    Where that he hit the scales braste:
    The dragon then faynted sore,
    And cast a galon and more
    Out of his mouthe of venim strong,
    And on syr Bevis he it flong:
    It was venymous y-wis.

This seems to be meant by the Dragon of Wantley's stink, ver. 110. As
the politick knight's creeping out, and attacking the dragon, &c. seems
evidently to allude to the following:

    Bevis blessed himselfe and forth yode,
    And lepte out with haste full good;
    And Bevis unto the dragon gone is;
    And the dragon also to Bevis.
    Longe, and harde was that fyght
    Betwene the dragon, and that knyght:
    But ever whan syr Bevis was hurt sore,
    He went to the well, and washed him thore;
    He was as hole as any man,
    Ever freshe as whan he began.
    The dragon sawe it might not avayle
    Besyde the well to hold batayle;
    He thought he would, wyth some wyle,
    Out of that place Bevis begyle;
    He woulde have flowen then awaye,
    But Bevis lepte after with good Morglaye,
    And hyt him under the wynge,
    As he was in his flyenge, &c.

                                                 Sign. M. jv. L. j. &c.

After all, perhaps the writer of this ballad was acquainted with the
above incidents only thro' the medium of Spenser, who has assumed
most of them in his _Faery Queen_. At least some particulars in the
description of the Dragon, &c. seem evidently borrowed from the latter.
See book i. canto 11, where the Dragon's "two wynges like sayls--huge
long tayl--with stings--his cruel rending clawes--and yron teeth--his
breath of smothering smoke and sulphur"--and the duration of the fight
for upwards of two days, bear a great resemblance to passages in the
following ballad; though it must be confessed that these particulars
are common to all old writers of romance.

Altho' this ballad must have been written early in the last century,
we have met with none but such as were comparatively modern copies.
It is here printed from one in Roman letter, in the Pepys collection,
collated with such others as could be procured.

A description of the supposed scene of this ballad, which was
communicated to the Editor in 1767, is here given in the words of the
relater:--

"In Yorkshire, 6 miles from Rotherham, is a village, called _Wortley_,
the seat of the late _Wortley Montague_, Esq. About a mile from this
village is a lodge, named _Warncliff Lodge_, but vulgarly called
_Wantley_: here lies the scene of the song. I was there about forty
years ago: and it being a woody rocky place, my friend made me clamber
over rocks and stones, not telling me to what end, till I came to a
sort of a cave; then asked my opinion of the place, and pointing to
one end, says, Here lay the dragon killed by _Moor_ of _Moor-hall_:
here lay his head; here lay his tail; and the stones we came over on
the hill, are those he could not crack; and yon white house you see
half a mile off, is _Moor-hall_. I had dined at the lodge, and knew the
man's name was _Matthew_, who was a keeper to Mr. Wortley, and, as he
endeavoured to persuade me, was the same Matthew mentioned in the song:
In the house is the picture of the Dragon and Moor of Moor-hall, and
near it a well, which, says he, is the well described in the ballad."

Since the former editions of this humorous old song were printed, the
following _Key to the Satire_ hath been communicated by _Godfrey_
_Bosville_, Esq. of Thorp, near Malton, in Yorkshire; who, in the most
obliging manner, gave full permission to adjoin it to the poem.

_Warncliffe_ Lodge, and _Warncliffe_ Wood (vulgarly pronounced
_Wantley_), are in the parish of Penniston, in Yorkshire. The rectory
of Penniston was part of the dissolved monastery of St. Stephen's,
Westminster; and was granted to the Duke of Norfolk's family: who
therewith endowed an hospital, which he built at Sheffield, for women.
The trustees let the impropriation of the great Tythes of Penniston to
the Wortley family, who got a great deal by it, and wanted to get still
more; for Mr. Nicholas Wortley attempted to take the tythes in kind,
but Mr. Francis Bosville opposed him, and there was a decree in favour
of the Modus in 37th Eliz. The vicarage of Penniston did not go along
with the rectory, but with the copyhold rents, and was part of a large
purchase made by Ralph Bosville, Esq. from Q. Elizabeth, in the 2d year
of her reign: and that part he sold in 12th Eliz. to his elder brother
Godfrey, the father of Francis; who left it, with the rest of his
estate, to his wife, for her life, and then to Ralph, 3d son of his
uncle Ralph. The widow married Lyonel Rowlestone, lived eighteen years,
and survived Ralph.

This premised, the ballad apparently relates to the law-suit carried on
concerning this claim of tythes made by the Wortley family. "Houses and
churches, were to him geese and turkeys:" which are tytheable things,
the dragon chose to live on. Sir Francis Wortley, the son of Nicholas,
attempted again to take the tythes in kind: but the parishioners
subscribed an agreement to defend their Modus. And at the head of the
agreement was Lyonel Rowlestone, who is supposed to be one of "the
Stones, dear Jack, which the Dragon could not crack." The agreement
is still preserved in a large sheet of parchment, dated 1st of James
I., and is full of names and seals, which might be meant by the coat
of armour, "with spikes all about, both within and without." _More_
of _More-hall_ was either the attorney, or counsellor, who conducted
the suit. He is not distinctly remembered, but More-hall is still
extant at the very bottom of Wantley [Warncliff] Wood, and lies so low,
that it might be said to be in a well: as the dragon's den [Warncliff
Lodge] was at the top of the wood, "with Matthew's house hard by it."
The keepers belonging to the Wortley family were named, for many
generations, Matthew Northall: the last of them left this lodge,
within memory, to be keeper to the Duke of Norfolk. The present owner
of More-hall still attends Mr. Bosville's Manor-Court at Oxspring,
and pays a rose a year. "More of More-hall, with nothing at all, slew
the Dragon of Wantley." He gave him, instead of tythes, so small a
Modus, that it was in effect nothing at all, and was slaying him with a
vengeance. "The poor children three," &c. cannot surely mean the three
sisters of Francis Bosville, who would have been coheiresses, had he
made no will? The late Mr. Bosville had a contest with the descendants
of two of them, the late Sir Geo. Saville's father, and Mr. Copley,
about the presentation to Penniston, they supposing Francis had not the
power to give this part of the estate from the heirs at law; but it was
decided against them. The dragon (Sir Francis Wortley) succeeded better
with his cousin Wordesworth, the freehold lord of the manor (for it
is the copyhold manor that belongs to Mr. Bosville) having persuaded
him not to join the refractory parishioners, under a promise that he
would let him his tythes cheap: and now the estates of Wortley and
Wordesworth are the only lands that pay tythes in the parish.

       *       *       *       *       *

N.B. "Two days and a night," mentioned in ver. 125, as the duration of
the combat, was probably that of the trial at law.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [In Gough's edition of Camden's _Britannia_ we learn that "Sir
  Thomas Wortley, who was knight of the body to Edward IV.,
  Richard III., Henry VII. and VIII., built a lodge in his chace of
  Warncliffe, and had a house and park there, disparked in the Civil
  War."

  Mr. Gilfillan has the following note in his edition of the
  _Reliques_, "A legend current in the Wortley family states the
  dragon to have been a formidable drinker, drunk dead by the
  chieftain of the opposite moors. Ellis thinks it was a wolf or some
  other fierce animal hunted down by More of More-hall." A writer
  in the _Notes and Queries_ (3rd S. ix. 29), who signs himself
  "Fitzhopkins," expresses his disbelief in the above explanation
  communicated to Percy by Godfrey Bosville.]

       *       *       *       *       *

      Old stories tell how Hercules
        A dragon slew at Lerna,
      With seven heads, and fourteen eyes,
        To see and well discern-a:
    But he had a club, this dragon to drub,                            5
      Or he had ne'er done it, I warrant ye:
    But More of More-Hall, with nothing at all,
      He slew the dragon of Wantley.

      This dragon had two furious wings,
        Each one upon each shoulder;                                  10
      With a sting in his tayl as long as a flayl,
        Which made him bolder and bolder.
    He had long claws, and in his jaws
      Four and forty teeth of iron;
    With a hide as tough, as any buff,                                15
      Which did him round environ.

      Have you not heard how the Trojan horse
        Held seventy men in his belly?
      This dragon was not quite so big,
        But very near, I'll tell ye.                                  20
    Devoured he poor children three,
      That could not with him grapple;
    And at one sup he eat them up,
      As one would eat an apple.


      All sorts of cattle this dragon did eat.                        25
        Some say he ate up trees,
      And that the forests sure he would
        Devour up by degrees:
    For houses and churches were to him geese and turkies;[433]
      He ate all, and left none behind,                               30
    But some stones, dear Jack, that he could not crack,
      Which on the hills you will find.

      In Yorkshire, near fair Rotherham,[434]
        The place I know it well;
      Some two or three miles, or thereabouts,                        35
        I vow I cannot tell.
    But there is a hedge, just on the hill edge,
      And Matthew's house hard by it;
    O there and then was this dragon's den,
      You could not chuse but spy it.                                 40

      Some say, this dragon was a witch;
        Some say, he was a devil,
      For from his nose a smoke arose,
        And with it burning snivel;
    Which he cast off, when he did cough,                             45
      In a well that he did stand by;
    Which made it look, just like a brook
      Running with burning brandy.

      Hard by a furious knight there dwelt,
        Of whom all towns did ring;                                   50
      For he could wrestle, play at quarter-staff, kick, cuff, and huff,
        Call son of a whore, do any kind of thing:
    By the tail and the main, with his hands twain
      He swung a horse till he was dead;
    And that which is stranger, he for very anger                     55
      Eat him all up but his head.

      These children, as I am told, being eat;
        Men, women, girls and boys,
      Sighing and sobbing, came to his lodging,
        And made a hideous noise:                                     60
    O save us all, More of More-Hall,
      Thou peerless knight of these woods;
    Do but slay this dragon, who won't leave us a rag on,
      We'll give thee all our goods.

      Tut, tut, quoth he, no goods I want;                            65
        But I want, I want, in sooth,
      A fair maid of sixteen, that's brisk, and keen,
        With smiles about the mouth;
    Hair black as sloe, skin white as snow,
      With blushes her cheeks adorning;                               70
    To anoynt me o'er night, ere I go to fight,
      And to dress me in the morning.

      This being done, he did engage
        To hew the dragon down;
      But first he went, new armour to                                75
        Bespeak at Sheffield town;
    With spikes all about, not within but without,
      Of steel so sharp and strong;
    Both behind and before, arms, legs, and all o'er
      Some five or six inches long.                                   80

      Had you but seen him in this dress,
        How fierce he look'd and how big,
      You would have thought him for to be
        Some Egyptian porcupig:

    He frighted all, cats, dogs, and all,                             85
      Each cow, each horse, and each hog:
    For fear they did flee, for they took him to be
      Some strange outlandish hedge-hog.

      To see this fight, all people then
        Got up on trees and houses,                                   90
      On churches some, and chimneys too;
        But these put on their trowses,
    Not to spoil their hose. As soon as he rose,
      To make him strong and mighty,
    He drank by the tale, six pots of ale,                            95
      And a quart of aqua-vitæ.

      It is not strength that always wins,
        For wit doth strength excell;
      Which made our cunning champion
        Creep down into a well;                                      100
    Where he did think, this dragon would drink,
      And so he did in truth;
    And as he stoop'd low, he rose up and cry'd, boh!
      And hit him in the mouth.

      O, quoth the dragon, pox take thee, come out,                  105
        Thou disturb'st me in my drink:
      And then he turn'd, and s... at him;
        Good lack how he did stink!
    Beshrew thy soul, thy body's foul,
      Thy dung smells not like balsam;                               110
    Thou son of a whore, thou stink'st so sore,
      Sure thy diet is unwholesome.

      Our politick knight, on the other side,
        Crept out upon the brink,
      And gave the dragon such a douse,                              115
        He knew not what to think:
    By cock, quoth he, say you so: do you see?
      And then at him he let fly

    With hand and with foot, and so they went to't;
      And the word it was, Hey boys, hey!                            120

      Your words, quoth the dragon, I don't understand:
        Then to it they fell at all,
      Like two wild boars so fierce, if I may,
        Compare great things with small.
    Two days and a night, with this dragon did fight                 125
      Our champion on the ground;
    Tho' their strength it was great, their skill it was neat,
      They never had one wound.

      At length the hard earth began to quake,
        The dragon gave him a knock,                                 130
      Which made him to reel, and straitway he thought,
        To lift him as high as a rock,
    And thence let him fall. But More of More-Hall,
      Like a valiant son of Mars,
    As he came like a lout, so he turn'd him about,                  135
      And hit him a kick on the a...

      Oh, quoth the dragon, with a deep sigh,
        And turn'd six times together,
      Sobbing and tearing, cursing and swearing
        Out of his throat of leather;                                140
    More of More-Hall! O thou rascàl!
      Would I had seen thee never;
    With the thing at thy foot, thou hast prick'd my a...gut,
      And I'm quite undone for ever.

      Murder, murder, the dragon cry'd,                              145
        Alack, alack, for grief;
      Had you but mist that place, you could
        Have done me no mischief.

    Then his head he shaked, trembled and quaked,
      And down he laid and cry'd;                                    150
    First on one knee, then on back tumbled he,
      So groan'd, kickt, s..., and dy'd.

FOOTNOTES:

[431] Collection of Historical Ballads in 3 vol. 1727.

[432] See above, pp. 108, 216.

[433] Ver. 29. were to him gorse and birches. _Other Copies._

[434] [Wharncliffe is about six miles from Rotherham.]




XIV.

ST. GEORGE FOR ENGLAND.


                            THE FIRST PART.

As the former song is in ridicule of the extravagant incidents in old
ballads and metrical romances; so this is a burlesque of their style;
particularly of the rambling transitions and wild accumulations of
unconnected parts, so frequent in many of them.

This ballad is given from an old black-letter copy in the Pepys
collection, "imprinted at London, 1612." It is more ancient than many
of the preceding; but we place it here for the sake of connecting it
with the _Second Part_.

       *       *       *       *       *

[_Saint George that, O! did break the dragon's heart_ is one of the
ballads offered for sale by Nightingale, the ballad-singer in Ben
Jonson's comedy of _Bartholomew Fair_ (act ii. sc. 1), and according
to Fielding's Tom Jones, _St. George, he was for England_, was one of
Squire Western's favourite tunes.

This ballad is printed in several collections, and Mr. Chappell notices
a modernization subscribed S. S. and "printed for W. Gilbertson in
Giltspur Street," about 1659, which commences--

    "What need we brag or boast at all
    Of Arthur and his knights."]

       *       *       *       *       *

      Why doe you boast of Arthur and his knightes,
      Knowing 'well' how many men have endured fightes?
      For besides king Arthur, and Lancelot du lake,
      Or sir Tristram de Lionel, that fought for ladies sake;
      Read in old histories, and there you shall see
      How St. George, St. George the dragon made to flee.
    St. George he was for England; St. Dennis was for France;
        Sing, _Honi soit qui mal y pense_.

      Mark our father Abraham, when first he resckued Lot
      Onely with his household, what conquest there he got:
      David was elected a prophet and a king,
      He slew the great Goliah, with a stone within a sling:
      Yet these were not knightes of the table round;
      Nor St. George, St. George, who the dragon did confound.
    St. George he was for England; St. Dennis was for France;
        Sing, _Honi soit qui mal y pense_.

      Jephthah and Gideon did lead their men to fight,
      They conquered the Amorites, and put them all to flight:
      Hercules his labours 'were' on the plaines of Basse;
      And Sampson slew a thousand with the jawbone of an asse,
      And eke he threw a temple downe, and did a mighty spoyle:
      But St. George, St. George he did the dragon foyle.
    St. George he was for England; St. Dennis was for France;
        Sing, _Honi soit qui mal y pense_.

      The warres of ancient monarchs it were too long to tell,
      And likewise of the Romans, how farre they did excell;
      Hannyball and Scipio in many a fielde did fighte:
      Orlando Furioso he was a worthy knighte:
      Remus and Romulus, were they that Rome did builde:
      But St. George, St. George the dragon made to yielde.
    St. George he was for England; St. Dennis was for France;
        Sing, _Honi soit qui mal y pense_.

      The noble Alphonso, that was the Spanish king,
      The order of the red scarffes and bandrolles in did bring:[435]
      He had a troope of mighty knightes, when first he did begin,
      Which sought adventures farre and neare, that conquest they might
          win:
      The ranks of the Pagans he often put to flight:
      But St. George, St. George did with the dragon fight.
    St. George he was for England; St. Dennis was for France;
        Sing, _Honi soit qui mal y pense_.

      Many 'knights' have fought with proud Tamberlaine.
      Cutlax the Dane, great warres he did maintaine:
      Rowland of Beame, and good 'sir' Olivere
      In the forest of Acon slew both woolfe and beare:
      Besides that noble Hollander, 'sir' Goward with the bill:
      But St. George, St. George the dragon's blood did spill.
    St. George he was for England; St. Dennis was for France;
        Sing, _Honi soit qui mal y pense_.

      Valentine and Orson were of king Pepin's blood:
      Alfride and Henry they were brave knightes and good:
      The four sons of Aymon, that follow'd Charlemaine:
      Sir Hughon of Burdeaux, and Godfrey of Bullaine:
      These were all French knightes that lived in that age:
      But St. George, St. George the dragon did assuage.
    St. George he was for England; St. Dennis was for France;
        Sing, _Honi soit qui mal y pense_.

      Bevis conquered Ascapart, and after slew the boare,
      And then he crost beyond the seas to combat with the moore:
      Sir Isenbras, and Eglamore they were knightes most bold;
      And good Sir John Mandeville of travel much hath told:
      There were many English knights that Pagans did convert:
      But St. George, St. George pluckt out the dragon's heart.
    St. George he was for England; St. Dennis was for France;
        Sing, _Honi soit qui mal y pense_.

      The noble earl of Warwick, that was call'd sir Guy,
      The infidels and pagans stoutlie did defie;
      He slew the giant Brandimore, and after was the death
      Of that most ghastly dun cowe, the divell of Dunsmore heath;
      Besides his noble deeds all done beyond the seas:
      But St George, St. George the dragon did appease.
    St. George he was for England; St. Dennis was for France;
        Sing, _Honi soit qui mal y pense_.

      Richard C[oe]ur-de-lion erst king of this land,
      He the lion gored with his naked hand:[436]
      The false duke of Austria nothing did he feare;
      But his son he killed with a boxe on the eare;
      Besides his famous actes done in the holy lande:
      But St. George, St. George the dragon did withstande.
    St. George he was for England; St. Dennis was for France;
        Sing, _Honi soit qui mal y pense_.

      Henry the fifth he conquered all France,
      And quartered their arms, his honour to advance:
      He their cities razed, and threw their castles downe,
      And his head he honoured with a double crowne:
      He thumped the French-men, and after home he came:
      But St. George, St. George he did the dragon tame.
    St. George he was for England; St. Dennis was for France;
        Sing, _Honi soit qui mal y pense_.

      St. David of Wales the Welsh-men much advance:
      St. Jaques of Spaine, that never yet broke lance:
      St. Patricke of Ireland, which was St. Georges boy,
      Seven yeares he kept his horse, and then stole him away:
      For which knavish act, as slaves they doe remaine:
      But St. George, St. George the dragon he hath slaine.
    St. George he was for England; St. Dennis was for France;
        Sing, _Honi soit qui mal y pense_.

FOOTNOTES:

[435] This probably alludes to "An Ancient Order of Knighthood, called
the Order of the Band, instituted by Don Alphonsus, king of Spain, ...
to wear a red riband of three fingers breadth," &c. See Ames _Typog._
p. 327.

[436] Alluding to the fabulous exploits attributed to this king in the
old romances. See the dissertation affixed to this volume.




XV.

ST. GEORGE FOR ENGLAND.


                            THE SECOND PART.

Was written by JOHN GRUBB, M.A. of Christ Church, Oxford. The occasion
of its being composed is said to have been as follows. A set of
gentlemen of the university had formed themselves into a club, all the
members of which were to be of the name of _George_: Their anniversary
feast was to be held on _St. George's_ day. Our author solicited
strongly to be admitted; but his name being unfortunately _John_, this
disqualification was dispensed with only upon this condition, that
he would compose a song in honour of their Patron Saint, and would
every year produce one or more new stanzas, to be sung on their annual
festival. This gave birth to the following humorous performance,
the several stanzas of which were the produce of many successive
anniversaries.[437]

This diverting poem was long handed about in manuscript, at length a
friend of _Grubb's_ undertook to get it printed, who, not keeping pace
with the impatience of his friends, was addressed in the following
whimsical macaronic lines, which, in such a collection as this, may not
improperly accompany the poem itself.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Expostulatiuncula_, sive _Querimoniuncula_ ad _Antonium_ [_Atherton_]
ob Poema _Johannis Grubb_, Viri #tou pany# ingeniosissimi in lucem
nondum editi.

    _Toni!_ Tune sines divina poemata Grubbi
    Intomb'd in secret thus still to remain any longer,
    #Tounoma sou# shall last, #Ô Grubbe diamperes aei#,
    Grubbe tuum nomen vivet dum nobilis ale-a
    Efficit heroas, dignamque heroe puellam.
    Est genus heroum, quos nobilis efficit alea-a
    Qui pro niperkin clamant, quaternque liquoris
    Quem vocitant Homines Brandy, Superi Cherry-brandy,
    Sæpe illi longcut, vel small-cut flare Tobacco
    Sunt soliti pipos. Ast si generosior herba
    (Per varios casus, per tot discrimina rerum)
    Mundungus desit, tum non funcare recusant
    Brown-paper tostâ, vel quod fit arundine bed-mat.
    Hic labor, hoc opus est heroum ascendere sedes!
    Ast ego quo rapiar! quo me feret entheus ardor
    Grubbe, tui memorem? Divinum expande poema.
    Quæ mora? quæ ratio est, quin Grubbi protinus anser
    Virgilii, Flaccique simul canat inter olores?

At length the importunity of his friends prevailed, and Mr. Grubb's
song was published at Oxford, under the following title:

                         _The British Heroes._
                  A New Poem in honour of St. George,
                         By Mr. _John Grubb_,
                    School-master of Christ-Church,
                             _Oxon._ 1688.

    Favete linguis: carmina non prius
    Audita, musarum sucerdos
    Canto.--

                                                          HOR.

                     Sold by Henry Clements. Oxon.

       *       *       *       *       *

      The story of king Arthur old
        Is very memorable,
      The number of his valiant knights,
        And roundness of his table:
      The knights around his table in                                  5
        A circle sate d'ye see:
      And altogether made up one
        Large hoop of chivalry.
      He had a sword, both broad and sharp,
        Y-clepd Caliburn,                                             10
      Would cut a flint more easily,
        Than pen-knife cuts a corn;
      As case-knife does a capon carve,
        So would it carve a rock,
      And split a man at single slash,                                15
        From noddle down to nock.
      As Roman Augur's steel of yore
        Dissected Tarquin's riddle,
      So this would cut both conjurer
        And whetstone thro' the middle.                               20
      He was the cream of Brecknock,
        And flower of all the Welsh:
      But George he did the dragon fell,
        And gave him a plaguy squelsh.[438]
    St. George he was for England; St. Dennis was for France;         25
        Sing, _Honi soit qui mal y pense_.

      Pendragon, like his father Jove,
        Was fed with milk of goat;
      And like him made a noble shield
        Of she-goat's shaggy coat:                                    30
      On top of burnisht helmet he
        Did wear a crest of leeks;
      And onions' heads, whose dreadful nod
        Drew tears down hostile cheeks.
      Itch, and Welsh blood did make him hot,                         35
        And very prone to ire;
      H' was ting'd with brimstone, like a match,
        And would as soon take fire.
      As brimstone he took inwardly
        When scurf gave him occasion,                                 40
      His postern puff of wind was a
        Sulphureous exhalation.
      The Briton never tergivers'd,
        But was for adverse drubbing,
      And never turn'd his back to aught,                             45
        But to a post for scrubbing.
      His sword would serve for battle, or
        For dinner, if you please;
      When it had slain a Cheshire man,
        'Twould toast a Cheshire cheese.                              50
      He wounded, and, in their own blood
        Did anabaptize Pagans:
      But George he made the dragon an
        Example to all dragons.
    St. George he was for England; St. Dennis was for France;         55
      Sing, _Honi soit qui mal y pense_.

      Brave Warwick Guy, at dinner time,
        Challeng'd a gyant savage;
      And streight came out the unweildy lout
        Brim-full of wrath and cabbage:                               60
      He had a phiz of latitude,
        And was full thick i' th' middle;
      The chekes of puffed trumpeter,
        And paunch of squire Beadle.[439]
      But the knight fell'd him, like an oak,                         65
        And did upon his back tread;
      The valiant knight his weazon cut,
        And Atropos his packthread.
      Besides he fought with a dun cow,
        As say the poets witty,                                       70
      A dreadful dun, and horned too,
        Like dun of Oxford city:
      The fervent dog-days made her mad,
        By causing heat of weather,
      Syrius and Procyon baited her,                                  75
        As bull-dogs did her father:
      Grafiers, nor butchers this fell beast,
        E'er of her frolick hindered;
      John Dosset[440] she'd knock down as flat,
        As John knocks down her kindred:                              80
      Her heels would lay ye all along,
        And kick into a swoon;
      Frewin's[441] cow-heels keep up your corpse,
        But hers would beat you down.
      She vanquisht many a sturdy wight,                              85
        And proud was of the honour;
      Was pufft by mauling butchers so,
        As if themselves had blown her.
      At once she kickt, and pusht at Guy,
        But all that would not fright him;                            90
      Who wav'd his winyard o'er sir-loyn,
        As if he'd gone to knight him.
      He let her blood, frenzy to cure,
        And eke he did her gall rip;
      His trenchant blade, like cook's long spit,                     95
        Ran thro' the monster's bald-rib:
      He rear'd up the vast crooked rib,
        Instead of arch triumphal:
      But George hit th' dragon such a pelt,
        As made him on his bum fall.                                 100
    St. George he was for England; St. Dennis was for France;
        Sing, _Honi soit qui mal y pense_.

      Tamerlain, with Tartarian bow,
        The Turkish squadrons slew;
      And fetch'd the pagan crescent down,                           105
        With half-moon made of yew:
      His trusty bow proud Turks did gall,
        With showers of arrows thick,
      And bow-strings, without strangling, sent
        Grand Viziers to old Nick:                                   110
      Much turbants, and much Pagan pates
        He made to humble in dust;
      And heads of Saracens he fixt
        On spear, as on a sign-post:
      He coop'd in cage Bajazet the prop                             115
        Of Mahomet's religion,
      As if't been the whispering bird,
        That prompted him; the pigeon.
      In Turkey leather scabbard, he
        Did sheathe his blade so trenchant:                          120
      But George he swinged the dragon's tail,
        And cut off every inch on't.
    St. George he was for England; St. Dennis was for France;
        Sing, _Honi soit qui mal y pense_.

      The amazon Thalestris was                                      125
        Both beautiful, and bold;
      She sear'd her breasts with iron hot,
        And bang'd her foes with cold.
      Her hand was like the tool, wherewith
        Jove keeps proud mortals under:                              130
      It shone just like his lightning,
        And batter'd like his thunder.
      Her eye darts lightning, that would blast
        The proudest he that swagger'd,
      And melt the rapier of his soul,                               135
        In its corporeal scabbard.
      Her beauty, and her drum to foes
        Did cause amazement double;
      As timorous larks amazed are
        With light, and with a low-bell:                             140

      With beauty, and that lapland-charm,[442]
        Poor men she did bewitch all;
      Still a blind whining lover had,
        As Pallas had her scrich-owl.
      She kept the chastness of a nun                                145
        In armour, as in cloyster:
      But George undid the dragon just
        As you'd undo an oister.
    St. George he was for England; St. Dennis was for France;
        Sing, _Honi soit qui mal y pense_.                           150

      Stout Hercules, was offspring of
        Great Jove, and fair Alcmene:
      One part of him celestial was,
        One part of him terrene.
      To scale the hero's cradle walls                               155
        Two fiery snakes combin'd,
      And, curling into swaddling cloaths,
        About the infant twin'd:
      But he put out these dragons' fires,
        And did their hissing stop;                                  160
      As red-hot iron with hissing noise
        Is quencht in blacksmith's shop.
      He cleans'd a stable, and rubb'd down
        The horses of new-comers;
      And out of horse-dung he rais'd fame,                          165
        As Tom Wrench[443] does cucumbers.
      He made a river help him through;
        Alpheus was under-groom;
      The stream, disgust at office mean,
        Ran murmuring thro' the room:                                170
      This liquid ostler to prevent
        Being tired with that long work,
      His father Neptune's trident took,
        Instead of three-tooth'd dung-fork.
      This Hercules, as soldier, and                                 175
        As spinster, could take pains;
      His club would sometimes spin ye flax,
        And sometimes knock out brains:
      H' was forc'd to spin his miss a shift
        By Juno's wrath and hér-spite;                               180
      Fair Omphale whipt him to his wheel,
        As cook whips barking turn-spit.
      From man, or churn he well knew how
        To get him lasting fame:
      He'd pound a giant, till the blood,                            185
        And milk till butter came.
      Often he fought with huge battoon,
        And oftentimes he boxed;
      Tapt a fresh monster once a month,
        As Hervey[444] doth fresh hogshead.                          190
      He gave Anteus such a hug,
        As wrestlers give in Cornwall:
      But George he did the dragon kill,
        As dead as any door-nail.
    St. George he was for England; St. Dennis was for France;        195
        Sing, _Honi soit qui mal y pense_.

      The Gemini, sprung from an egg,
        Were put into a cradle:
      Their brains with knocks and bottled ale,
        Were often-times full addle:                                 200
      And, scarcely hatch'd, these sons of him,
        That hurls the bolt trisulcate,
      With helmet-shell on tender head,
        Did tustle with red-ey'd pole-cat.
      Castor a horseman, Pollux tho'                                 205
        A boxer was, I wist:
      The one was fam'd for iron heel;
        Th' other for leaden fist.
      Pollux to shew he was god,
        When he was in a passion                                     210
      With fist made noses fall down flat
        By way of adoration:

      This fist, as sure as French disease,
        Demolish'd noses' ridges:
      He like a certain lord[445] was famd'                          215
        For breaking down of bridges.
      Castor the flame of fiery steed,
        With well-spur'd boots took down;
      As men, with leathern buckets, quench
        A fire in country town.                                      220
      His famous horse, that liv'd on oats,
        Is sung on oaten quill;
      By bards' immortal provender
        The nag surviveth still.
      This shelly brood on none but knaves                           225
        Employ'd their brisk artillery:
      And flew as naturally at rogues,
        As eggs at thief in pillory.[446]
      Much sweat they spent in furious fight,
        Much blood they did effund:                                  230
      Their whites they vented thro' the pores;
        Their yolks thro' gaping wound:
      Then both were cleans'd from blood and dust
        To make a heavenly sign;
      The lads were, like their armour, scowr'd,                     235
        And then hung up to shine;
      Such were the heavenly double-Dicks,
        The sons of Jove and Tyndar:
      But George he cut the dragon up,
        As he had bin duck or windar.[447]                           240
    St. George he was for England; St. Dennis was for France;
        Sing, _Honi soit qui mal y pense_.

      Gorgon a twisted adder wore
        For knot upon her shoulder:
      She kemb'd her hissing periwig,                                245
        And curling snakes did powder.
      These snakes they made stiff changelings
        Of all the folks they hist on;
      They turned barbars into hones,
        And masons into free-stone:                                  250
      Sworded magnetic Amazon
        Her shield to load-stone changes;
      Then amorous sword by magic belt
        Clung fast unto her haunches.
      This shield long village did protect,                          255
        And kept the army from-town,
      And chang'd the bullies into rocks,
        That came t' invade Long-Compton.[448]
      She post-diluvian stores unmans,
        And Pyrrha's work unravels;                                  260
      And stares Deucalion's hardy boys
        Into their primitive pebbles.
      Red noses she to rubies turns,
        And noddles into bricks:
      But George made dragon laxative;                               265
        And gave him a bloody flix.
    St. George he was for England; St. Dennis was for France;
        Sing, _Honi soit qui mal y pense_.

      By boar-spear Meleager got,
        An everlasting name,                                         270
      And out of haunch of basted swine,
        He hew'd eternal fame.
      This beast each hero's trouzers ript,
        And rudely shew'd his bare-breech,
      Prickt but the wem, and out there came                         275
        Heroic guts and garbadge.
      Legs were secur'd by iron boots
        No more, than peas by peascods:
      Brass helmets, with inclosed sculls,
        Wou'd crackle in's mouth like chestnuts.                     280
      His tawny hairs erected were
        By rage, that was resistless;
      And wrath, instead of cobler's wax,
        Did stiffen his rising bristles.
      His tusk lay'd dogs so dead asleep,                            285
        Nor horn, nor whip cou'd wake 'um:
      It made them vent both their last blood,
        And their last album-grecum.
      But the knight gor'd him with his spear,
        To make of him a tame one,                                   290
      And arrows thick, instead of cloves,
        He stuck in monster's gammon.
      For monumental pillar, that
        His victory might be known,
      He rais'd up, in cylindric form,                               295
        A collar of the brawn.

      He sent his shade to shades below,
        In Stygian mud to wallow:
      And eke the stout St. George eftsoon,
        He made the dragon follow.                                   300
    St. George he was for England; St. Dennis was for France;
        Sing, _Honi soit qui mal y pense_.

      Achilles of old Chiron learnt
        The great horse for to ride;
      H' was taught by th' Centaur's rational part,                  305
        The hinnible to bestride.
      Bright silver feet, and shining face
        Had that stout hero's mother;
      As rapier's silver'd at one end,
        And wounds you at the other.                                 310
      Her feet were bright, his feet were swift,
        As hawk pursuing sparrow:
      Her's had the metal, his the speed
        Of Braburn's[449] silver arrow.
      Thetis to double pedagogue                                     315
        Commits her dearest boy;
      Who bred him from a slender twig
        To be the scourge of Troy:
      But ere he lash't the Trojans, h' was
        In Stygian waters steept;                                    320
      As birch is soaked first in piss,
        When boys are to be whipt.
      With skin exceeding hard, he rose
        From lake, so black and muddy,
      As lobsters from the ocean rise,                               325
        With shell about their body:
      And, as from lobster's broken claw,
        Pick out the fish you might:
      So might you from one unshell'd heel
        Dig pieces of the knight.                                    330
      His myrmidons robb'd Priam's barns
        And hen-roosts, says the song;
      Carried away both corn and eggs,
        Like ants from whence they sprung.
      Himself tore Hector's pantaloons,                              335
        And sent him down bare-breech'd
      To pedant Radamanthus, in
        A posture to be switch'd.
      But George he made the dragon look,
        As if he had been bewitch'd.                                 340
    St. George he was for England; St. Dennis was for France;
        Sing, _Honi soit qui mal y pense_.

      Full fatal to the Romans was
        The Carthaginian Hanni-
      bal; him I mean, who gave them such                            345
        A devilish thump at Cannæ:
      Moors thick, as goats on Penmenmure,
        Stood on the Alpes's front:
      Their one-eyed guide,[450] like blinking mole,
        Bor'd thro' the hindring mount:                              350
      Who, baffled by the massy rock,
        Took vinegar for relief;
      Like plowmen, when they hew their way
        Thro' stubborn rump of beef.
      As dancing louts from humid toes                               355
        Cast atoms of ill favour
      To blinking Hyatt,[451] when on vile crowd
        He merriment does endeavour,
      And saws from suffering timber out
        Some wretched tune to quiver:                                360
      So Romans slunk and squeak'd at sight
        Of Affrican carnivor.
      The tawny surface of his phiz
        Did serve instead of vizzard:
      But George he made the dragon have                             365
        A grumbling in his gizzard.
    St. George he was for England; St. Dennis was for France;
        Sing, _Honi soit qui mal y pense_.

      The valour of Domitian,
        It must not be forgotten;                                    370
      Who from the jaws of worm-blowing flies,
        Protected veal and mutton.
      A squadron of flies errant,
        Against the foe appears;
      With regiments of buzzing knights,                             375
        And swarms of volunteers:
      The warlike wasp encourag'd 'em,
        With animating hum;
      And the loud brazen hornet next,
        He was their kettle-drum:                                    380
      The Spanish don Cantharido
        Did him most sorely pester,
      And rais'd on skin of vent'rous knight
        Full many a plaguy blister.
      A bee whipt thro' his button hole,                             385
        As thro' key hole a witch,
      And stabb'd him with her little tuck
        Drawn out of scabbard breech:
      But the undaunted knight lifts up
        An arm both big and brawny,                                  390
      And slasht her so, that here lay head,
        And there lay bag and honey:

      Then 'mongst the rout he flew as swift,
        As weapon made by Cyclops,
      And bravely quell'd seditious buz,                             395
        By dint of massy fly-flops.
      Surviving flies do curses breathe,
        And maggots too at Cæsar:
      But George he shav'd the dragon's beard,
        And Askelon[452] was his razor.                              400
    St. George he was for England; St. Dennis was for France;
        Sing, _Honi soit qui mal y pense_.

[Illustration]

_John Grubb_, the facetious writer of the foregoing song, makes a
distinguished figure among the Oxford wits so humorously enumerated in
the following distich:

    Alma novem genuit célebres Rhedycina poetas
    Bub, Stubb, Grubb, Crabb, Trap, Young, Carey, Tickel, Evans.

These were Bub Dodington (the late lord Melcombe), Dr. Stubbes, our
poet _Grubb_, Mr. Crabb, Dr. Trapp the poetry-professor, Dr. Edw.
Young, the author of Night-Thoughts, Walter Carey, Thomas Tickel, Esq.,
and Dr. Evans the epigrammatist.

As for our poet _Grubb_, all that we can learn further of him is
contained in a few extracts from the University Register, and from his
epitaph. It appears from the former that he was matriculated in 1667,
being the son of John Grubb, "_de Acton Burnel in comitatu Salop.
pauperis_." He took his degree of Bachelor of Arts, June 28, 1671: and
became Master of Arts, June 28, 1675. He was appointed Head Master of
the Grammar School at Christ Church: and afterwards chosen into the
same employment at Gloucester, where he died in 1697, as appears from
his monument in the church of St. Mary de Crypt in Gloucester, which is
inscribed with the following epitaph:--

                               H. S. E.
                        _Johannes Grubb, A. M._
              Natus apud Acton Burnel in agro Salopiensi
                            Anno Dom. 1645.
                   Cujus variam in linguis notitiam,
               et felicem erudiendis pueris industriam,
                 gratâ adhuc memoriâ testatur Oxonium:
                    Ibi enim Ædi Christi initiatus,
                            artes excoluit;
                    Pueros ad easdem mox excolendas
                          accuratè formavit:
                               Huc demum
                   unanimi omnium consensu accitus,
                      eandem suscepit provinciam,
                     quam feliciter adeo absolvit,
                         ut nihil optandum sit
                  nisi ut diutius nobis interfuisset:
                               Fuit enim
                 propter festivam ingenij suavitatem,
                     simplicem morum candorem, et
                præcipuam erga cognatos benevolentiam,
                       omnibus desideratissimus.
                Obiit 2do die Aprilis, Anno Dni. 1697.
                            Ætatis suæ 51.

FOOTNOTES:

[437] To this circumstance it is owing that the editor has never met
with two copies, in which the stanzas are arranged alike, he has
therefore thrown them into what appeared the most natural order. The
verses are properly long Alexandrines, but the narrowness of the page
made it necessary to subdivide them: they are here printed with many
improvements.

[438] [blow.]

[439] Men of bulk answerable to their places, as is well known at
Oxford.

[440] A butcher that then served the college.

[441] A cook, who on fast nights was famous for selling cow-heel and
tripe.

[442] The drum.

[443] Who kept Paradise gardens at Oxford.

[444] A noted drawer at the Mermaid tavern in Oxford.

[445] Lord Lovelace broke down the bridges about Oxford, at the
beginning of the Revolution. See on this subject a Ballad in Smith's
Poems, p. 102. London, 1713.

[446] It has been suggested by an ingenious correspondent that this was
a popular subject at that time:--

    Not carted bawd, or Dan de Foe,
    In wooden ruff ere bluster'd so.

                                                  Smith's Poems, p. 117

[447] [perhaps a contraction of windhover, a kind of hawk.]

[448] See the account of Rolricht Stones, in Dr. Plott's _Hist. of_
_Oxfordshire_.

[449] Braburn, a gentleman commoner of Lincoln college, gave a silver
arrow to be shot for by the archers of the university of Oxford.

[450] Hannibal had but one eye.

[451] A one-eyed fellow, who pretended to make fiddles, as well as play
on them; well known at that time in Oxford.

[452] The name of St. George's sword.




XVI.

MARGARET'S GHOST.


This ballad, which appeared in some of the public newspapers in or
before the year 1724, came from the pen of David Mallet, Esq. who
in the edition of his poems, 3 vols. 1759, informs us that the plan
was suggested by the four verses quoted above in page 124, which he
supposed to be the beginning of some ballad now lost.

"These lines, says he, naked of ornament and simple, as they are,
struck my fancy; and bringing fresh into my mind an unhappy adventure
much talked of formerly, gave birth to the following poem, which was
written many years ago."

The two introductory lines (and one or two others elsewhere) had
originally more of the ballad simplicity, viz.

    "When all was wrapt in dark midnight,
    And all were fast asleep," &c.

In a late publication, intitled, _The Friends_, &c. Lond. 1773, 2 vols.
12mo. (in the first volume, p. 71) is inserted a copy of the foregoing
ballad, with very great variations, which the editor of that work
contends was the original; and that Mallet adopted it for his own and
altered it, as here given.--But the superior beauty and simplicity of
the present copy, gives it so much more the air of an original, that it
will rather be believed that some transcriber altered it from Mallet's,
and adapted the lines to his own taste; than which nothing is more
common in popular songs and ballads.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [This ballad, more generally known as _William and Margaret_, is
  supposed to have been printed for the first time in Aaron Hill's
  _Plain Dealer_ (No. 36, July 24, 1724), when the author was a very
  young man. Hill introduced it to the reader as the work of an old
  poet, and wrote, "I am sorry I am not able to acquaint my readers
  with his name to whom we owe this melancholy piece of finished
  poetry under the humble title of a ballad." In the following month
  the editor announced that "he had discovered the author to be still
  alive." The verses were probably written in 1723, in the August of
  which year Mallet left Scotland, for Allan Ramsay, in his _Stanzas
  to Mr. David Mallock on his departure from Scotland_, alludes to
  them:--

    "But he that could, in tender strains,
      Raise Margaret's plaining shade,
    And paints distress that chills the veins,
      While William's crimes are red."

  The ballad at once became popular, and was printed in several
  collections, undergoing many alterations for the worse by the
  way. Sundry attempts were made to rob Mallet of the credit of his
  song. Besides the one mentioned above by Percy, Captain Thompson,
  the editor of Andrew Marvell's Works, claimed it for Marvell, but
  this claim was even more ridiculous than those he set up against
  Addison and Watts. Although Mallet doubtless knew the ballads _Fair
  Margaret and Sweet William_ (book ii. No. 4) and _Sweet William's
  Ghost_ (No. 6), he is said to have founded his own upon a true
  story which came under his observation. A daughter of Professor
  James Gregory of St. Andrews, and afterwards of Edinburgh, was
  seduced by a son of Sir William Sharp of Strathyrum, who had
  promised to marry her, but heartlessly deserted her.

  The ballad has been extravagantly praised: Ritson observes, "It
  may be questioned whether any English writer has produced so fine
  a ballad as _William and Margaret_." Percy describes it as one of
  the most beautiful ballads in our own or any other language; and
  Allan Ramsay writes, "I know not where to seek a finer mixture of
  pathos and terror in the whole range of Gothic romance." Scott,
  on the other hand, was of opinion that "The ballad, though the
  best of Mallet's writing, is certainly inferior to the original,
  which I presume to be the very fine and terrific old Scottish tale,
  beginning

    'There came a ghost to Margaret's door.'"

  The extreme popularity of the poem is seen by the various parodies,
  one of which, _Watty and Madge_, is printed in Ramsay's _Tea_
  _Table Miscellany_ (vol. iii.). It commences--

    "'Twas at the shining mid-day hour,"

  and each succeeding verse is parodied in the same manner. Vincent
  Browne imitated the original in Latin verse, and a German version
  was published as _Wilhelm und Gretchen_.

  Mallet was a native of Crieff in Perthshire, and is believed to
  have been born in the year 1702. He was sometime tutor to the
  Montrose family, through whose influence he was introduced into
  public life. He changed his name from Malloch to Mallet when he
  settled in London, and in 1742 he was appointed Under Secretary to
  the Prince of Wales. He died on the 21st of April, 1765. Mallet
  is a writer little cared for now, but he can hardly be said to
  be neglected, for in 1857 Mr. Frederick Dinsdale published an
  illustrated edition of his Ballads and Songs, chiefly made up of
  copious notes on _William and Margaret_ and _Edwin and Emma_.]

       *       *       *       *       *

    'Twas at the silent solemn hour,
      When night and morning meet;
    In glided Margaret's grimly ghost,
      And stood at William's feet.

    Her face was like an April morn,                                   5
      Clad in a wintry cloud:
    And clay-cold was her lily hand,
      That held her sable shrowd.

    So shall the fairest face appear,
      When youth and years are flown:                                 10
    Such is the robe that kings must wear,
      When death has reft their crown.

    Her bloom was like the springing flower,
      That sips the silver dew;
    The rose was budded in her cheek,                                 15
      Just opening to the view.

    But love had, like the canker worm,
      Consum'd her early prime:
    The rose grew pale, and left her cheek;
      She dy'd before her time.                                       20

    "Awake!" she cry'd, "thy true love calls,
      Come from her midnight grave;
    Now let thy pity hear the maid,
      Thy love refus'd to save.

    "This is the dark and dreary hour,                                25
      When injur'd ghosts complain;
    Now yawning graves give up their dead,
      To haunt the faithless swain.

    "Bethink thee, William, of thy fault,
      Thy pledge, and broken oath:                                    30
    And give me back my maiden vow,
      And give me back my troth.

    "Why did you promise love to me,
      And not that promise keep?
    Why did you swear mine eyes were bright,                          35
      Yet leave those eyes to weep?

    "How could you say my face was fair,
      And yet that face forsake?
    How could you win my virgin heart,
      Yet leave that heart to break?                                  40

    "Why did you say my lip was sweet,
      And made the scarlet pale?
    And why did I, young witless maid,
      Believe the flattering tale?

    "That face, alas! no more is fair;                                45
      These lips no longer red:
    Dark are my eyes, now clos'd in death,
      And every charm is fled.

    "The hungry worm my sister is;
      This winding-sheet I wear:                                      50
    And cold and weary lasts our night,
      Till that last morn appear.

    "But hark! the cock has warn'd me hence!
      A long and last adieu!
    Come see, false man, how low she lies,                            55
      Who dy'd for love of you."

    The lark sung loud; the morning smil'd,
      With beams of rosy red:
    Pale William shook in ev'ry limb,
      And raving left his bed.                                        60

    He hyed him to the fatal place,
      Where Margaret's body lay;
    And stretch'd him on the grass-green turf,
      That wrapt her breathless clay:

    And thrice he call'd on Margaret's name,                          65
      And thrice he wept full sore:
    Then laid his cheek to her cold grave,
      And word spake never more.




XVII.

LUCY AND COLIN


Was written by Thomas Tickell, Esq. the celebrated friend of Mr.
Addison, and editor of his works. He was son of a clergyman in the
north of England, had his education at Queen's college, Oxon, was under
secretary to Mr. Addison and Mr. Craggs, when successively secretaries
of state; and was lastly (in June, 1724) appointed secretary to the
Lords Justices in Ireland, which place he held till his death in
1740.[453] He acquired Mr. Addison's patronage by a poem in praise of
the opera of _Rosamond_, written while he was at the University.

It is a tradition in Ireland, that the song was written at
Castletown, in the county of Kildare, at the request of the then Mrs.
Conolly--probably on some event recent in that neighbourhood.

[Gray called _Lucy and Colin_ "the prettiest" ballad in the world,
although he was not partial to Tickell's other poems.

The fine old melody given by Dr. Rimbault for this ballad is taken from
"_The Merry Musician; or a Cure for the Spleen_; being a collection of
the most diverting Songs and pleasant Ballads set to Musick," 1716.]

       *       *       *       *       *

    Of Leinster, fam'd for maidens fair,
      Bright Lucy was the grace;
    Nor e'er did Liffy's limpid stream
      Reflect so fair a face.

    Till luckless love, and pining care                                5
      Impair'd her rosy hue,
    Her coral lip, and damask cheek,
      And eyes of glossy blue.

    Oh! have you seen a lily pale,
      When beating rains descend?                                     10
    So droop'd the slow-consuming maid;
      Her life now near its end.

    By Lucy warn'd, of flattering swains
      Take heed, ye easy fair:
    Of vengeance due to broken vows,                                  15
      Ye perjured swains, beware.

    Three times, all in the dead of night,
      A bell was heard to ring;
    And at her window, shrieking thrice,
      The raven flap'd his wing.                                      20

    Too well the love-lorn maiden knew
      That solemn boding sound;
    And thus, in dying words, bespoke
      The virgins weeping round.

    "I hear a voice, you cannot hear,                                 25
      Which says I must not stay:
    I see a hand, you cannot see,
      Which beckons me away.

    "By a false heart, and broken vows,
      In early youth I die.                                           30
    Am I to blame, because his bride
      Is thrice as rich as I?

    "Ah Colin! give not her thy vows;
      Vows due to me alone:
    Nor thou, fond maid, receive his kiss,                            35
      Nor think him all thy own.

    "To-morrow in the church to wed,
      Impatient, both prepare;
    But know, fond maid, and know, false man,
      That Lucy will be there,                                        40

    "Then, bear my corse; ye comrades, bear,
      The bridegroom blithe to meet;
    He in his wedding-trim so gay,
      I in my winding-sheet."

    She spoke, she dy'd;--her corse was borne,                        45
      The bridegroom blithe to meet;
    He in his wedding-trim so gay,
      She in her winding-sheet.

    Then what were perjur'd Colin's thoughts?
      How were those nuptials kept?                                   50
    The bride-men flock'd round Lucy dead,
      And all the village wept.

    Confusion, shame, remorse, despair
      At once his bosom swell:
    The damps of death bedew'd his brow,                              55
      He shook, he groan'd, he fell.

    From the vain bride (ah bride no more!)
      The varying crimson fled,
    When, stretch'd before her rival's corse,
      She saw her husband dead.                                       60

    Then to his Lucy's new-made grave,
      Convey'd by trembling swains,
    One mould with her, beneath one sod,
      For ever now remains.

    Oft at their grave the constant hind                              65
      And plighted maid are seen;
    With garlands gay, and true-love knots
      They deck the sacred green.

    But, swain forsworn, whoe'er thou art,
      This hallow'd spot forbear;                                     70
    Remember Colin's dreadful fate,
      And fear to meet him there.

FOOTNOTES:

[453] Born 1686.




XVIII.

THE BOY AND THE MANTLE,

AS REVISED AND ALTERED BY A MODERN HAND.


Mr. Warton, in his ingenious _Observations on Spenser_, has given his
opinion, that the fiction of the _Boy and the Mantle_ is taken from
an old French piece intitled _Le court mantel_, quoted by M. de St.
Palaye in his curious _Mémoires sur l'ancienne Chevalerie_, Paris,
1759, 2 tom. 12mo., who tells us the story resembles that of Ariosto's
inchanted cup. 'Tis possible our English poet may have taken the hint
of this subject from that old French romance, but he does not appear to
have copied it in the manner of execution; to which (if one may judge
from the specimen given in the _Mémoires_) that of the ballad does not
bear the least resemblance. After all, 'tis most likely that all the
old stories concerning K. Arthur are originally of British growth, and
that what the French and other southern nations have of this kind,
were at first exported from this island. See _Mémoires de l'Acad. des
Inscrip._ tom. xx. p. 352.

(Since this volume was printed off, the _Fabliaux ou Contes_, 1781, 5
tom. 12mo., of _M. le Grand_, have come to hand: and in tom. i. p. 54,
he hath printed a modern version of the old tale _Le Court Mantel_,
under a new title _Le Manteau maltaillé_; which contains the story of
this ballad much enlarged, so far as regards the _Mantle_; but without
any mention of the _Knife_, or the _Horn_.)

       *       *       *       *       *

  [See book i. No. 1, for the original of this ballad.]

       *       *       *       *       *

    In Carleile dwelt king Arthur,
      A prince of passing might;
    And there maintain'd his table round,
      Beset with many a knight.

    And there he kept his Christmas                                    5
      With mirth and princely cheare,
    When, lo! a straunge and cunning boy
      Before him did appeare.

    A kirtle and a mantle
      This boy had him upon,                                          10
    With brooches, rings, and owches[454]
      Full daintily bedone.

    He had a sarke[455] of silk
      About his middle meet;
    And thus, with seemly curtesy,                                    15
      He did king Arthur greet.

    "God speed thee, brave king Arthur,
      Thus feasting in thy bowre.
    And Guenever thy goodly queen,
      That fair and peerlesse flowre.                                 20

    "Ye gallant lords, and lordings,
      I wish you all take heed,
    Lest, what ye deem a blooming rose
      Should prove a cankred weed."

    Then straitway from his bosome                                    25
      A little wand he drew;
    And with it eke a mantle
      Of wondrous shepe, and hew.

    "Now have thou here, king Arthur,
      Have this here of mee,                                          30
    And give unto thy comely queen,
      All-shapen as you see.

    "No wife it shall become,
      That once hath been to blame."
    Then every knight in Arthur's court                               35
      Slye glaunced at his dame.

    And first came lady Guenever,
      The mantle she must trye.
    This dame, she was new-fangled,
      And of a roving eye.                                            40

    When she had tane the mantle,
      And all was with it cladde,
    From top to toe it shiver'd down,
      As tho' with sheers beshradde.

    One while it was too long,                                        45
      Another while too short,
    And wrinkled on her shoulders
      In most unseemly sort.

    Now green, now red it seemed,
      Then all of sable hue.                                          50
    "Beshrew me, quoth king Arthur,
      I think thou beest not true."

    Down she threw the mantle,
      Ne longer would not stay;
    But storming like a fury,                                         55
      To her chamber flung away.

    She curst the whoreson weaver,
      That had the mantle wrought:
    And doubly curst the froward impe,
      Who thither had it brought.                                     60

    "I had rather live in desarts
      Beneath the green-wood tree:
    Than here, base king, among thy groomes,
      The sport of them and thee."

    Sir Kay call'd forth his lady,                                    65
      And bade her to come near:
    "Yet dame, if thou be guilty,
      I pray thee now forbear."

    This lady, pertly gigling,
      With forward step came on,                                      70
    And boldly to the little boy
      With fearless face is gone.

    When she had tane the mantle,
      With purpose for to wear:
    It shrunk up to her shoulder,                                     75
      And left her b**side bare.

    Then every merry knight,
      That was in Arthur's court,
    Gib'd, and laught, and flouted,
      To see that pleasant sport.                                     80

    Down she threw the mantle,
      No longer bold or gay,
    But with a face all pale and wan,
      To her chamber slunk away.

    Then forth came an old knight,                                    85
      A pattering o'er his creed;
    And proffer'd to the little boy
      Five nobles to his meed;

    "And all the time of Christmass
      Plumb-porridge shall be thine,                                  90
    If thou wilt let my lady fair
      Within the mantle shine."

    A saint his lady seemed,
      With step demure, and slow,
    And gravely to the mantle                                         95
      With mincing pace doth goe,

    When she the same had taken,
      That was so fine and thin,
    It shrivell'd all about her,
      And show'd her dainty skin.                                    100

    Ah! little did HER mincing,
      Or HIS long prayers bestead;
    She had no more hung on her,
      Than a tassel and a thread.

    Down she threwe the mantle,                                      105
      With terror and dismay,
    And, with a face of scarlet,
      To her chamber hyed away.

    Sir Cradock call'd his lady,
      And bade her to come neare;                                    110
    "Come win this mantle, lady,
      And do me credit here.

    "Come win this mantle, lady,
      For now it shall be thine,
    If thou hast never done amiss,                                   115
      Sith first I made thee mine."

    The lady gently blushing,
      With modest grace came on,
    And now to trye this wondrous charm
      Courageously is gone.                                          120

    When she had tane the mantle,
      And put it on her backe,
    About the hem it seemed
      To wrinkle and to cracke.

    "Lye still, shee cried, O mantle!                                125
      And shame me not for nought,
    I'll freely own whate'er amiss,
      Or blameful I have wrought.

    "Once I kist Sir Cradocke
      Beneathe the green wood tree:                                  130
    Once I kist Sir Cradocke's mouth
      Before he married me."

    When thus she had her shriven,
      And her worst fault had told,
    The mantle soon became her                                       135
      Right comely as it shold.

    Most rich and fair of colour,
      Like gold it glittering shone:
    And much the knights in Arthur's court
      Admir'd her every one.                                         140

    Then towards king Arthur's table
      The boy he turn'd his eye:
    Where stood a boar's-head garnished
      With bayes and rosemarye.

    When thrice he o'er the boar's head                              145
      His little wand had drawne,
    Quoth he, "There's never a cuckold's knife,
      Can carve this head of brawne."

    Then some their whittles rubbed
      On whetstone, and on hone:                                     150
    Some threwe them under the table,
      And swore that they had none.

    Sir Cradock had a little knife
      Of steel and iron made;
    And in an instant thro' the skull                                155
      He thrust the shining blade.

    He thrust the shining blade
      Full easily and fast:
    And every knight in Arthur's court
      A morsel had to taste.                                         160

    The boy brought forth a horne,
      All golden was the rim:
    Said he, "No cuckolde ever can
      Set mouth unto the brim.

    "No cuckold can this little horne                                165
      Lift fairly to his head;
    But or on this, or that side,
      He shall the liquor shed."

    Some shed it on their shoulder,
      Some shed it on their thigh;                                   170
    And hee that could not hit his mouth,
      Was sure to hit his eye.

    Thus he, that was a cuckold,
      Was known of every man:
    But Cradock lifted easily,                                       175
      And wan the golden can.

    Thus boar's head, horn and mantle
      Were this fair couple's meed:
    And all such constant lovers,
      God send them well to speed.                                   180

    Then down in rage came Guenever,
      And thus could spightful say,
    "Sir Cradock's wife most wrongfully
      Hath borne the prize away.

    "See yonder shameless woman,                                     185
      That makes herselfe so clean:
    Yet from her pillow taken
      Thrice five gallants have been.

    "Priests, clarkes, and wedded men
      Have her lewd pillow prest:                                    190
    Yet she the wondrous prize forsooth
      Must beare from all the rest."

    Then bespake the little boy,
      Who had the same in hold:
    "Chastize thy wife, king Arthur,                                 195
      Of speech she is too bold:

    "Of speech she is too bold,
      Of carriage all too free;
    Sir king, she hath within thy hall
      A cuckold made of thee.                                        200

    "All frolick light and wanton
      She hath her carriage borne:
    And given thee for a kingly crown
      To wear a cuckold's horne."

                                                 [***]

       *       *       *       *       *

  [***] The Rev. Evan Evans, editor of the specimens of _Welsh_
  _Poetry_, 4to. affirmed that the _Boy and the Mantle_ is taken from
  what is related in some of the old Welsh MSS. of Tegan Earfron,
  one of King Arthur's mistresses. She is said to have possessed a
  mantle that would not fit any immodest or incontinent woman; this,
  (which, the old writers say, was reckoned among the curiosities of
  Britain) is frequently alluded to by the old Welsh Bards.

  _Carleile_, so often mentioned in the ballads of K. Arthur, the
  editor once thought might probably be a corruption of _Caer-leon_,
  an ancient British city on the river Uske, in Monmouthshire, which
  was one of the places of K. Arthur's chief residence; but he is now
  convinced, that it is no other than _Carlisle_, in Cumberland; the
  old English minstrels, being most of them northern men, naturally
  represented the hero of romance as residing in the north: And many
  of the places mentioned in the old ballads are still to be found
  there: As _Tearne-Wadling_, &c.

  Near Penrith is still seen a large circle, surrounded by a mound of
  earth, which retains the name of Arthur's Round Table.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [For a full statement of the claims of the "North" to be considered
  as the home of King Arthur, see J. S. Stuart Glennie's Essay on
  _Arthurian Localities_, in the edition of the Prose Romance of
  _Merlin_, published by the Early English Text Society.]

FOOTNOTES:

[454] [bosses or buttons of gold.]

[455] [shirt.]




XIX.

THE ANCIENT FRAGMENT OF THE MARRIAGE OF SIR GAWAINE.[456]


The second poem in this volume, intitled _The Marriage of Sir
Gawaine_, having been offered to the reader with large conjectural
supplements and corrections, the old fragment itself is here literally
and exactly printed from the editor's folio MS. with all its defects,
inaccuracies, and errata; that such austere antiquaries, as complain
that the ancient copies have not been always rigidly adhered to, may
see how unfit for publication many of the pieces would have been, if
all the blunders, corruptions, and nonsense of illiterate reciters and
transcribers had been superstitiously retained, without some attempt to
correct and emend them.

This ballad had most unfortunately suffered by having half of every
leaf in this part of the MS. torn away; and, as about nine stanzas
generally occur in the half page now remaining, it is concluded, that
the other half contained nearly the same number of stanzas.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [The following poem is printed in Hales' and Furnivall's edition of
  the MS., vol. i. p. 105.]

       *       *       *       *       *

    Kinge Arthur liues in merry Carleile,
    & seemely is to see,
    & there he hath w^{th} him Queene Genev^r,
    y^t bride soe bright of blee.

    And there he hath w^{th} him Queene Genever,
    y^t bride soe bright in bower,
    & all his barons about him stoode
    y^t were both stiffe & stowre.

    The K. kept a royall Christmasse
    of mirth & great honor,
    & when....

                    [_About Nine Stanzas wanting._]

    And bring me word what thing it is
    y^t a woman most desire.
    this shalbe thy ransome, Arthur, he sayes
    for Ile haue noe other hier.

    K. Arthur then held vp his hand
    according thene as was the law;
    he tooke his leaue of the baron there,
    & homward can he draw.

    And when he came to Merry Carlile,
    to his chamber he is gone,
    & ther came to him his Cozen S^r Gawaine
    as he did make his mone.

    And there came to him his Cozen S^r Gawaine
    y^t was a curteous knight,
    why sigh you soe sore vnckle Arthur, he said
    or who hath done thee vnright.

    O peace, o peace, thou gentle Gawaine,
    y^t faire may thee beffall,
    for if thou knew my sighing soe deepe,
    thou wold not meruaile att all;

    ffor when I came to tearne wadling,
    a bold barron there I fand,
    w^{th} a great club vpon his backe,
    standing stiffe & strong;

    And he asked me wether I wold fight,
    or from him I shold be gone,
    o[r] else I must him a ransome pay
    & soe dep't him from.

    To fight w^{th} him I saw noe cause,
    me thought it was not meet,
    ffor he was stiffe & strong w^{th} all,
    his strokes were nothing sweete.

    Therfor this is my ransome, Gawaine
    I ought to him to pay
    I must come againe, as I am sworne,
    vpon the Newyeers day.

    And I must bring him word what thing it is

                    [_About Nine Stanzas wanting._]

    Then king Arthur drest him for to ryde
    in one soe rich array
    toward the foresaid Tearne wadling,
    y^t he might keepe his day.

    And as he rode over a more,
    hee see a lady where shee sate
    betwixt an oke & a greene hollen[457]:
    she was cladd in red scarlett.

    Then there as shold have stood her mouth,
    then there was sett her eye
    the other was in her forhead fast
    the way that she might see.

    Her nose was crooked & turnd outward,
    her mouth stood foule a wry;
    a worse formed lady then shee was,
    neuer man saw w^{th} his eye.

    To halch[458] vpon him, k. Arthur
    this lady was full faine
    but k. Arthur had forgott his lesson
    what he shold say againe

    What knight art thou, the lady sayd,
    that wilt not speake to me?
    of me be thou nothing dismayd
    tho I be vgly to see;

    for I haue halched you curteouslye,
    & you will not me againe,
    yett I may happen S^r knight, shee said
    to ease thee of thy paine.

    Giue thou ease me, lady, he said
    or helpe me any thing,
    thou shalt haue gentle Gawaine, my cozen
    & marry him w^{th} a ring.

    Why, if I helpe thee not, thou noble k. Arthur
    of thy owne hearts desiringe,
    of gentle Gawaine....

                    [_About Nine Stanzas wanting._]

    And when he came to the tearne wadling
    the baron there cold he fimde[459]
    w^{th} a great weapon on his backe,
    standing stiffe & stronge

    And then he tooke k. Arthur's letters in his hands
    & away he cold them fling,
    & then he puld out a good browne sword,
    & cryd himselfe a k.

    And he sayd, I haue thee & thy land, Arthur
    to doe as it pleaseth me,
    for this is not thy ransome sure,
    therfore yeeld thee to mee.

    And then bespoke him noble Arthur,
    & bad him hold his hands,
    & give me leave to speake my mind
    in defence of all my land.

    He said as I came over a More,
    I see a lady where shee sate
    betweene an oke & a green hollen;
    shee was clad in red scarlett;

    And she says a woman will haue her will,
    & this is all her cheefe desire:
    doe me right as thou art a baron of sckill,
    this is thy ransome & and all thy hyer.

    He sayes an early vengeance light on her,
    she walkes on yonder more;
    it was my sister that told thee this
    & she is a misshappen hore.

    But heer Ile make mine avow[460] to god
    to do her an euill turne,
    for an euer I may thate fowle theefe get,
    in a fyer I will her burne.

                    [_About Nine Stanzas wanting._]

       *       *       *       *       *


THE 2D PART.

    Sir Lancelott & S^r Steven bold
    they rode w^{th} them that day,
    and the formost of the company
    there rode the steward Kay,

    Soe did S^r Banier & S^r Bore
    S^r Garrett w^{th} them soe gay,
    soe did S^r Tristeram y^t gentle k^t,
    to the forrest fresh & gay

    And when he came to the greene forrest
    vnderneath a greene holly tree
    their sate that lady in red scarlet
    y^t vnseemly was to see.

    S^r Kay beheld this Ladys face,
    & looked vppon her smire[461]
    whosoeuer kisses this lady, he sayes
    of his kisse he standes in feare.

    Sir Kay beheld the lady againe,
    & looked vpon her snout,
    whosoeuer kisses this lady, he saies,
    of his kisse he stands in doubt.

    Peace coz. Kay, then said S^r Gawaine
    amend thee of thy life;
    for there is a knight amongst us all
    y^t must marry her to his wife.

    What, wedd her to wiffe, then said S^r Kay,
    in the diuells name anon,
    gett me a wiffe where ere I may,
    for I had rather be slaine.

    Then soome tooke vp their hawkes in hast
    & some tooke vp their hounds,
    & some sware they wold not marry her
    for Citty nor for towne.

    And then be spake him noble k. Arthur,
    & sware there by this day,
    for a litle foule sight and misliking

                    [_About Nine Stanzas wanting._]

    Then shee said choose thee gentle Gawaine,
    truth as I doe say,
    wether thou wilt haue me in this liknesse
    in the night or else in the day.

    And then bespake him Gentle Gawaine,
    w^{th} one soe mild of moode,
    sayes, well I know what I wold say,
    god grant it may be good.

    To haue thee fowle in the night
    when I w^{th} thee shold play;
    yet I had rather, if I might
    haue thee fowle in the day.

    What, when Lords goe w^{th} ther seires,[462] shee said
    both to the Ale & wine
    alas then I must hyde my selfe,
    I must not goe withinne.

    And then bespake him gentle gawaine,
    said, Lady thats but a skill;
    And because thou art my owne lady,
    thou shalt haue all thy will.

    Then she said, blesed be thou gentle Gawain
    this day y^t I thee see,
    for as thou see me att this time,
    from hencforth I wilbe:

    My father was an old knight,
    & yett it chanced soe
    that he marryed a younge lady
    y^t brought me to this woe.

    Shee witched me, being a faire young Lady,
    to the greene forrest to dwell,
    & there I must walke in womans liknesse,
    most like a feend of hell.

    She witched my brother to a Carlist B....

                    [_About Nine Stanzas wanting_.]

    that looked soe foule & that was wont
    on the wild more to goe.

    Come kisse her, Brother Kay, then said S^r Gawaine,
    & amend the of thy liffe;
    I sweare this is the same lady
    y^t I marryed to my wiffe.

    S^r Kay kissed that lady bright,
    standing vpon his ffeete;
    he swore, as he was trew knight,
    the spice was neuer soe sweete.

    Well, Coz. Gawaine, sayes S^r Kay,
    thy chance is fallen arright,
    for thou hast gotten one of the fairest maids
    I euer saw w^{th} my sight.

    It is my fortune, said S^r Gawaine;
    for my Vnckle Arthurs sake
    I am glad as grasse wold be of raine,
    great Ioy that I may take.

    S^r Gawaine tooke the lady by the one arme,
    S^r Kay tooke her by the tother,
    they led her straight to k. Arthur
    as they were brother & brother.

    K. Arthur welcomed them there all,
    & soe did lady Geneuer his queene,
    w^{th} all the knights of the round table
    most seemly to be seene.

    K. Arthur beheld that lady faire
    that was soe faire & bright,
    he thanked christ in trinity
    for S^r Gawaine that gentle knight;

    Soe did the knights, both more and lesse,
    reioyced all that day
    for the good chance y^t hapened was
    to S^r Gawaine & his lady gay.

                                                                 Ffins.

FOOTNOTES:

[456] [Printed for the first time in the fourth edition.]

[457] [holly.]

[458] [salute.]

[459] Sic MS. = finde.

[460] [my vow.]

[461] [qy. for swire = neck.]

[462] Sic in MS. pro _feires_, i.e. Mates.

                       THE END OF THE THIRD BOOK.

[Illustration]




APPENDIX I.

THE WANTON WIFE OF BATH.


[Illustration]

[Illustration]

APPENDIX I.




THE WANTON WIFE OF BATH.


From an ancient copy in black-print, in the Pepys Collection. Mr.
Addison has pronounced this an excellent ballad: see the _Spectator_,
No. 248.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [This ballad was printed in the third volume of the first edition
  of the _Reliques_, Book ii. No. 12, but was afterwards expunged
  by Percy. Professor Child gives the following references in his
  collection of _English and Scottish Ballads_, vol. viii. p.
  152:--"The same story circulates among the peasantry of England and
  Scotland in the form of a penny tract or chap-book, _Notices of_
  _Popular Histories_, p. 16, (_Percy Soc._ vol. xxiii.); _Notes and
  Queries_, New Series, vol. iii. p. 49. This jest is an old one.
  Mr. Halliwell refers to a fabliau in Barbazan's Collection, which
  contains the groundwork of this piece, _Du Vilain qui Conquist
  Paradis par Plait_, Meon's ed. iv. 114."]

       *       *       *       *       *

    In Bath a wanton wife did dwelle,
      As Chaucer he doth write;
    Who did in pleasure spend her dayes;
      And many a fond delight.

    Upon a time sore sicke she was                                     5
      And at the length did dye;
    And then her soul at heaven gate,
      Did knocke most mightilye.

    First Adam came unto the gate:
      Who knocketh there? quoth hee                                   10
    I am the wife of Bath, she sayd,
      And faine would come to thee.

    Thou art a sinner, Adam sayd,
      And here no place shalt have.
    And so art thou, I trowe, quoth shee,                             15
      'and eke a' doting knave.[463]

    I will come in, in spight, she sayd,
      Of all such churles as thee;
    Thou wert the causer of our woe,
      Our paine and misery;                                           20

    And first broke God's commandiments,
      In pleasure of thy wife.
    When Adam heard her tell this tale,
      He ranne away for life.

    Then downe came Jacob at the gate,                                25
      And bids her packe to hell,
    Thou false deceiving knave, quoth she
      Thou mayst be there as well.

    For thou deceiv'dst thy father deare,
      And thine own brother too.                                      30
    Away 'slunk' Jacob presently,
      And made no more adoo.

    She knockes again with might and maine,
      And Lot he chides her straite,
    How now, quoth she, thou drunken ass,                             35
      Who bade thee here to prate?

    With thy two daughters thou didst lye,
      On them two bastardes got.
    And thus most tauntingly she chaft
      Against poor silly Lot.                                         40

    Who calleth there, quoth Judith then,
      With such shrill sounding notes?
    This fine minkes surely came not here,
      Quoth she, for cutting throats.

    Good Lord, how Judith blush'd for shame,                          45
      When she heard her say soe!
    King David hearing of the same,
      He to the gate would goe.

    Quoth David, who knockes there so loud,
      And maketh all this strife;                                     50
    You were more kinde, good sir, she sayd,
      Unto Uriah's wife.

    And when thy servant thou didst cause
      In battle to be slaine;
    Thou causedst far more strife than I,                             55
      Who would come here so faine.

    The woman's mad, quoth Solomon,
      That thus doth taunt a king.
    Not half so mad as you, she sayd,
      I trowe in manye a thing.                                       60

    Thou hadst seven hundred wives at once,
      For whom thou didst provide;
    And yet God wot, three hundred whores
      Thou must maintaine beside:

    And they made thee forsake thy God,                               65
      And worship stockes and stones;
    Besides the charge they put thee to
      In breeding of young bones.

    Hadst thou not bin beside thy wits,
      Thou wouldst not thus have ventur'd;                            70
    And therefore I do marvel much,
      How thou this place hast enter'd.

    I never heard, quoth Jonas then,
      So vile a scold as this.
    Thou whore-son run-away, quoth she,                               75
      Thou diddest more amiss.

    'They say,' quoth Thomas, women's tongues,[464]
      Of aspen-leaves are made.
    Thou unbelieving wretch, quoth she,
      All is not true that's sayd.                                    80

    When Mary Magdalen heard her then,
      She came unto the gate.
    Quoth she, good woman, you must think
      Upon your former state.

    No sinner enters in this place                                    85
      Quoth Mary Magdalene. Then
    'Twere ill for you, fair mistress mine,
      She answered her agen:

    You for your honestye, quoth she,
      Had once been ston'd to death;                                  90
    Had not our Saviour Christ come by,
      And written on the earth.

    It was not by your occupation,
      You are become divine:
    I hope my soul in Christ his passion,                             95
      Shall be as safe as thine.

    Uprose the good apostle Paul,
      And to this wife he cryed,
    Except thou shake thy sins away,
      Thou here shalt be denyed.                                     100

    Remember, Paul, what thou hast done,
      All through a lewd desire:
    How thou didst persecute God's church,
      With wrath as hot as fire.

    Then up starts Peter at the last,                                105
      And to the gate he hies:
    Fond fool, quoth he, knock not so fast,
      Thou weariest Christ with cries.

    Peter, said she, content thyselfe,
      For mercye may be won,                                         110
    I never did deny my Christ,
      As thou thyselfe hast done.

    When as our Saviour Christ heard this,
      With heavenly angels bright,
    He comes unto this sinful soul,                                  115
      Who trembled at his sight.

    Of him for mercye she did crave.
      Quoth he, thou hast refus'd
    My proffer'd grace, and mercy both,
      And much my name abus'd.                                       120

    Sore have I sinned, Lord, she sayd,
      And spent my time in vaine,
    But bring me like a wandring sheepe
      Into thy flocke againe.

    O Lord my God, I will amend                                      125
      My former wicked vice:
    The thief for one poor silly word,
      Past into Paradise.

    My lawes and my commandments,
      Saith Christ, were known to thee;                              130
    But of the same in any wise,
      Not yet one word did yee.

    I grant the same, O Lord, quoth she;
      Most lewdly did I live:
    But yet the loving father did                                    135
      His prodigal son forgive.

    So I forgive thy soul, he sayd,
      Through thy repenting crye;
    Come enter then into my joy,
      I will not thee denye.                                         140

FOOTNOTES:

[463] Ver. 16. Now gip you, _P._

[464] Ver. 77. I think, _P._

[Illustration]




APPENDIX II.

ON THE ANCIENT METRICAL ROMANCES, &c.


I.

The first attempts at composition among all barbarous nations are
ever found to be poetry and song. The praises of their gods, and the
achievements of their heroes, are usually chanted at their festival
meetings. These are the first rudiments of history. It is in this
manner that the savages of North America preserve the memory of past
events[465]; and the same method is known to have prevailed among our
Saxon ancestors before they quitted their German forests[466]. The
ancient Britons had their Bards, and the Gothic nations their Scalds
or popular poets[467], whose business it was to record the victories
of their warriors, and the genealogies of their princes, in a kind of
narrative songs, which were committed to memory, and delivered down
from one reciter to another. So long as poetry continued a distinct
profession, and while the Bard, or Scald, was a regular and stated
officer in the prince's court, these men are thought to have performed
the functions of the historian pretty faithfully; for though their
narrations would be apt to receive a good deal of embellishment, they
are supposed to have had at the bottom so much of truth as to serve
for the basis of more regular annals. At least succeeding historians
have taken up with the relations of these rude men, and for the want of
more authentic records, have agreed to allow them the credit of true
history[468].

After letters began to prevail, and history assumed a more stable form,
by being committed to plain simple prose; these songs of the Scalds
or Bards began to be more amusing than useful. And in proportion as
it became their business chiefly to entertain and delight, they gave
more and more into embellishment, and set off their recitals with such
marvellous fictions, as were calculated to captivate gross and ignorant
minds. Thus began stories of adventures with giants and dragons, and
witches and enchanters, and all the monstrous extravagances of wild
imagination, unguided by judgment, and uncorrected by art[469].

This seems to be the true origin of that species of romance, which
so long celebrated feats of chivalry, and which at first in metre,
and afterwards in prose, was the entertainment of our ancestors, in
common with their contemporaries on the continent, till the satire
of Cervantes, or rather the increase of knowledge and classical
literature, drove them off the stage to make room for a more refined
species of fiction, under the name of French Romances, copied from the
Greek[470].

That our old romances of chivalry may be derived in a lineal descent
from the ancient historical songs of the Gothic Bards and Scalds, will
be shown below, and indeed appears the more evident, as many of those
songs are still preserved in the north, which exhibit all the seeds
of chivalry before it became a solemn institution[471]. "Chivalry, as
a distinct military order, conferred in the way of investiture, and
accompanied with the solemnity of an oath, and other ceremonies," was
of later date, and sprung out of the feudal constitution, as an elegant
writer has clearly shown[472]. But the ideas of chivalry prevailed
long before in all the Gothic nations, and may be discovered as in
embriyo in the customs, manners, and opinions of every branch of that
people[473]. That fondness of going in quest of adventures, that spirit
of challenging to single combat, and that respectful complaisance shewn
to the fair sex, (so different from the manners of the Greeks and
Romans), all are of Gothic origin, and may be traced up to the earliest
times among all the northern nations[474]. These existed long before
the feudal ages, though they were called forth and strengthened in a
peculiar manner under that constitution, and at length arrived to their
full maturity in the times of the Crusades, so replete with romantic
adventures[475].

Even the common arbitrary fictions of romance were (as is hinted
above) most of them familiar to the ancient Scalds of the North, long
before the time of the Crusades. They believed the existence of giants
and dwarfs[476]; they entertained opinions not unlike the more modern
notion of fairies[477], they were strongly possessed with the belief of
spells and inchantment[478], and were fond of inventing combats with
dragons and monsters[479].

The opinion therefore seems very untenable, which some learned and
ingenious men have entertained, that the turn for chivalry, and the
taste for that species of romantic fiction were caught by the Spaniards
from the Arabians or Moors after their invasion of Spain, and from
the Spaniards transmitted to the bards of Armorica[480], and thus
diffused through Britain, France, Italy, Germany, and the North.
For it seems utterly incredible, that one rude people should adopt
a peculiar taste and manner of writing or thinking from another,
without borrowing at the same time any of their particular stories and
fables, without appearing to know anything of their heroes, history,
laws, and religion. When the Romans began to adopt and imitate the
Grecian literature, they immediately naturalized all the Grecian
fables, histories, and religious stories; which became as familiar to
the poets of Rome, as of Greece itself. Whereas all the old writers of
chivalry, and of that species of romance, whether in prose or verse,
whether of the Northern nations, or of Britain, France, and Italy,
not excepting Spain itself[481], appear utterly unacquainted with
whatever relates to the Mahometan nations. Thus with regard to their
religion, they constantly represent them as worshipping idols, as
paying adoration to a golden image of Mahomet, or else they confound
them with the ancient pagans, &c. And indeed in all other respects
they are so grossly ignorant of the customs, manners, and opinions of
every branch of that people, especially of their heroes, champions, and
local stories, as almost amounts to a demonstration that they did not
imitate them in their songs or romances: for as to dragons, serpents,
necromancies, &c., why should these be thought only derived from the
Moors in Spain so late as after the eighth century? since notions of
this kind appear too familiar to the northern Scalds and enter too
deeply into all the northern mythology, to have been transmitted to
the unlettered Scandinavians, from so distant a country, at so late a
period. If they may not be allowed to have brought these opinions with
them in their original migrations from the north of Asia, they will
be far more likely to have borrowed them from the Latin poets after
the Roman conquests in Gaul, Britain, Germany, &c. For, I believe one
may challenge the maintainers of this opinion, to produce any Arabian
poem or history, that could possibly have been then known in Spain,
which resembles the old Gothic romances of chivalry half so much as the
Metamorphoses of Ovid.

But we well know that the Scythian nations situate in the countries
about Pontus, Colchis, and the Euxine sea, were in all times infamous
for their magic arts: and as Odin and his followers are said to have
come precisely from those parts of Asia; we can readily account for
the prevalence of fictions of this sort among the Gothic nations of
the North, without fetching them from the Moors in Spain; who for many
centuries after their irruption, lived in a state of such constant
hostility with the unsubdued Spanish Christians, whom they chiefly pent
up in the mountains, as gave them no chance of learning their music,
poetry, or stories; and this, together with the religious hatred of the
latter for their cruel invaders, will account for the utter ignorance
of the old Spanish romancers in whatever relates to the Mahometan
nations, although so nearly their own neighbours.

On the other hand, from the local customs and situations, from the
known manners and opinions of the Gothic nations in the north, we
can easily account for all the ideas of chivalry and its peculiar
fictions[482]. For, not to mention their distinguished respect for the
fair sex, so different from the manners of the Mahometan nations[483],
their national and domestic history so naturally assumes all the
wonders of this species of fabling, that almost all their historical
narratives appear regular romances. One might refer in proof of this to
the old northern Sagas in general: but to give a particular instance
it will be sufficient to produce the history of King Regner Lodbrog, a
celebrated warrior and pirate, who reigned in Denmark about the year
800[484]. This hero signalized his youth by an exploit of gallantry.
A Swedish prince had a beautiful daughter whom he intrusted (probably
during some expedition) to the care of one of his officers, assigning
a strong castle for their defence. The officer fell in love with his
ward, and detained her in his castle, spite of all the efforts of
her father. Upon this he published a proclamation through all the
neighbouring countries, that whoever would conquer the ravisher and
rescue the lady should have her in marriage. Of all that undertook the
adventure, Regner alone was so happy as to achieve it: he delivered the
fair captive, and obtained her for his prize. It happened that the name
of this discourteous officer was Orme, which in the Islandic language
signifies serpent: Wherefore the Scalds, to give the more poetical
turn to the adventure, represent the lady as detained from her father
by a dreadful dragon, and that Regner slew the monster to set her at
liberty. This fabulous account of the exploit is given in a poem still
extant, which is even ascribed to Regner himself, who was a celebrated
poet; and which records all the valiant achievements of his life[485].

With marvelous embellishments of this kind the Scalds early began to
decorate their narratives: and they were the more lavish of these,
in proportion as they departed from their original institution,
but it was a long time before they thought of delivering a set of
personages and adventures wholly feigned. Of the great multitude of
romantic tales still preserved in the libraries of the North, most of
them are supposed to have had some foundation in truth, and the more
ancient they are, the more they are believed to be connected with true
history[486].

It was not probably till after the historian and the bard had been
long disunited, that the latter ventured at pure fiction. At length
when their business was no longer to instruct or inform, but merely
to amuse, it was no longer needful for them to adhere to truth. Then
succeeded fabulous songs and romances in verse, which for a long time
prevailed in France and England before they had books of chivalry in
prose. Yet in both these countries the minstrels still retained so much
of their original institution, as frequently to make true events the
subject of their songs[487]; and indeed, as during the barbarous ages,
the regular histories were almost all written in Latin by the monks,
the memory of events was preserved and propagated among the ignorant
laity by scarce any other means than the popular songs of the minstrels.

II. The inhabitants of Sweden, Denmark, and Norway, being the latest
converts to Christianity, retained their original manners and opinions
longer than the other nations of Gothic race: and therefore they have
preserved more of the genuine compositions of their ancient poets,
than their southern neighbours. Hence the progress, among them, from
poetical history to poetical fiction is very discernible: they have
some old pieces, that are in effect complete Romances of Chivalry[488].
They have also (as hath been observed) a multitude of Sagas[489] or
histories on romantic subjects, containing a mixture of prose and
verse, of various dates, some of them written since the times of the
Crusades, others long before: but their narratives in verse only are
esteemed the more ancient.

Now as the irruption of the Normans[490] into France under Rollo
did not take place till towards the beginning of the tenth century,
at which time the Scaldic art was arrived to the highest perfection
in Rollo's native country, we can easily trace the descent of the
French and English romances of chivalry from the Northern Sagas. That
conqueror doubtless carried many Scalds with him from the north,
who transmitted their skill to their children and successors. These
adopting the religion, opinions, and language of the new country,
substituted the heroes of Christendom instead of those of their pagan
ancestors, and began to celebrate the feats of Charlemagne, Roland,
and Oliver; whose true history they set off and embellished with the
Scaldic figments of dwarfs, giants, dragons, and enchantments. The
first mention we have in song of those heroes of chivalry is in the
mouth of a Norman warrior at the conquest of England[491]: and this
circumstance alone would sufficiently account for the propagation of
this kind of romantic poems among the French and English.

But this is not all; it is very certain, that both the Anglo-Saxons
and the Franks had brought with them, at their first emigrations into
Britain and Gaul, the same fondness for the ancient songs of their
ancestors, which prevailed among the other Gothic tribes[492], and
that all their first annals were transmitted in these popular oral
poems. This fondness they even retained long after their conversion
to Christianity, as we learn from the examples of Charlemagne and
Alfred[493]. Now poetry, being thus the transmitter of facts, would
as easily learn to blend them with fictions in France and England,
as she is known to have done in the north, and that much sooner, for
the reasons before assigned[494]. This, together with the example and
influence of the Normans, will easily account to us, why the first
romances of chivalry that appeared both in England and France[495]
were composed in metre, as a rude kind of epic songs. In both kingdoms
tales in verse were usually sung by minstrels to the harp on festival
occasions: and doubtless both nations derived their relish for this
sort of entertainment from their Teutonic ancestors, without either of
them borrowing it from the other. Among both people narrative songs on
true or fictitious subjects had evidently obtained from the earliest
times. But the professed romances of chivalry seem to have been first
composed in France, where also they had their name.

The Latin tongue, as is observed by an ingenious writer[496], ceased
to be spoken in France about the ninth century, and was succeeded
by what was called the Romance tongue, a mixture of the language of
the Franks and bad Latin. As the songs of chivalry became the most
popular compositions in that language, they were emphatically called
Romans or Romants; though this name was at first given to any piece of
poetry. The romances of chivalry can be traced as early as the eleventh
century[497]. I know not if the _Roman de Brut_ written in 1155, was
such: but if it was, it was by no means the first poem of the kind;
others more ancient are still extant[498]. And we have already seen,
that, in the preceding century, when the Normans marched down to the
battle of Hastings, they animated themselves, by singing (in some
popular romance or ballad) the exploits of Roland and the other heroes
of chivalry[499].

So early as this I cannot trace the songs of chivalry in English. The
most ancient I have seen, is that of Hornechild described below, which
seems not older than the twelfth century. However, as this rather
resembles the Saxon poetry than the French, it is not certain that the
first English romances were translated from that language[500]. We have
seen above, that a propensity to this kind of fiction prevailed among
all the Gothic nations[501]; and, though after the Norman Conquest,
this country abounded with French romances, or with translations from
the French, there is good reason to believe, that the English had
original pieces of their own.

The stories of King Arthur and his Round Table, may be reasonably
supposed of the growth of this island; both the French and the
Armoricans probably had them from Britain[502]. The stories of Guy
and Bevis, with some others, were probably the invention of English
minstrels[503]. On the other hand, the English procured translations of
such romances as were most current in France; and in the list given at
the conclusion of these remarks, many are doubtless of French original.

The first prose books of chivalry that appeared in our language, were
those printed by Caxton[504]; at least, these are the first I have
been able to discover, and these are all translations from the French.
Whereas romances of this kind had been long current in metre, and were
so generally admired in the time of Chaucer, that his rhyme of Sir
Thopas was evidently written to ridicule and burlesque them[505].

He expressly mentions several of them by name in a stanza, which I have
had occasion to quote more than once in this volume:

    "Men speken of Romaunces of pris
    Of Horn-Child, and of Ipotis
            Of Bevis, and Sire Guy
    Of Sire Libeux, and Pleindamour,
    But Sire Thopas, he bereth the flour
            Of real chevalrie"[506].

Most, if not all of these are still extant in MS. in some or other of
our libraries, as I shall shew in the conclusion of this slight essay,
where I shall give a list of such metrical histories and romances as
have fallen under my observation.

As many of these contain a considerable portion of poetic merit, and
throw great light on the manners and opinions of former times, it
were to be wished that some of the best of them were rescued from
oblivion. A judicious collection of them accurately published with
proper illustrations, would be an important accession to our stock of
ancient English literature. Many of them exhibit no mean attempts at
epic poetry, and though full of the exploded fictions of chivalry,
frequently display great descriptive and inventive powers in the
bards, who composed them. They are at least generally equal to any
other poetry of the same age. They cannot indeed be put in competition
with the nervous productions of so universal and commanding a genius
as Chaucer, but they have a simplicity that makes them be read with
less interruption, and be more easily understood: and they are far
more spirited and entertaining than the tedious allegories of Gower,
or the dull and prolix legends of Lydgate. Yet, while so much stress
was laid upon the writings of these last, by such as treat of English
poetry, the old metrical romances, though far more popular in their
time, were hardly known to exist. But it has happened unluckily, that
the antiquaries, who have revived the works of our ancient writers,
have been for the most part men void of taste and genius, and therefore
have always fastidiously rejected the old poetical romances, because
founded on fictitious or popular subjects, while they have been careful
to grub up every petty fragment of the most dull and insipid rhymist,
whose merit it was to deform morality, or obscure true history. Should
the publick encourage the revival of some of those ancient epic songs
of chivalry, they would frequently see the rich ore of an Ariosto or a
Tasso, though buried it may be among the rubbish and dross of barbarous
times.

Such a publication would answer many important uses: It would throw new
light on the rise and progress of English poetry, the history of which
can be but imperfectly understood, if these are neglected: It would
also serve to illustrate innumerable passages in our ancient classic
poets, which without their help must be for ever obscure. For, not
to mention Chaucer and Spencer, who abound with perpetual allusions
to them, I shall give an instance or two from Shakespeare, by way of
specimen of their use.

In his play of _King John_ our great dramatic poet alludes to an
exploit of Richard I. which the reader will in vain look for in any
true history. Faulconbridge says to his mother, act i. sc. 1.

    "Needs must you lay your heart at his dispose ...
    Against whose furie and unmatched force,
    The awlesse lion could not wage the fight,
    Nor keepe his princely heart from Richard's hand:
    He that perforce robs Lions of their hearts
    May easily winne a woman's:"

The fact here referred to, is to be traced to its source only in the
old romance of _Richard Ceur["C[oe]ur"?] de Lyon_[507], in which
his encounter with a lion makes a very shining figure. I shall give a
large extract from this poem, as a specimen of the manner of these old
rhapsodists, and to shew that they did not in their fictions neglect
the proper means to produce the ends, as was afterwards so childishly
done in the prose books of chivalry.

The poet tells us, that Richard, in his return from the Holy Land,
having been discovered in the habit of "a palmer in Almayne," and
apprehended as a spy, was by the king thrown into prison. Wardrewe,
the king's son, hearing of Richard's great strength, desires the
jailor to let him have a sight of his prisoners. Richard being the
foremost, Wardrewe asks him, "if he dare stand a buffet from his
hand?" and that on the morrow he shall return him another. Richard
consents, and receives a blow that staggers him. On the morrow, having
previously waxed his hands, he waits his antagonist's arrival. Wardrewe
accordingly, proceeds the story, "held forth as a trewe man," and
Richard gave him such a blow on the cheek, as broke his jawbone, and
killed him on the spot. The king, to revenge the death of his son,
orders, by the advice of one Eldrede, that a lion, kept purposely from
food, shall be turned loose upon Richard. But the king's daughter
having fallen in love with him, tells him of her father's resolution,
and at his request procures him forty ells of white silk "kerchers;"
and here the description of the combat begins:

    "The kever-chefes[508] he toke on honde,
    And aboute his arme he wonde;
    And thought in that ylke while,
    To slee the lyon with some gyle.
    And syngle in a kyrtyll he stode,
    And abode the lyon fyers and wode,
    With that came the jaylere,
    And other men that wyth him were,
    And the lyon them amonge;
    His pawes were stiffe and stronge.
    The chambre dore they undone,
    And the lyon to them is gone.
    Rycharde sayd, Helpe lorde Jesu!
    The lyon made to hym venu,
    And wolde hym have all to rente:
    Kynge Rycharde besyde hym glente[509]
    The lyon on the breste hym spurned,
    That aboute he tourned.
    The lyon was hongry and megre,
    And bette his tayle to be egre;
    He loked aboute as he were madde;
    Abrode he all his pawes spradde.
    He cryed lowde, and yaned[510] wyde.
    Kynge Rycharde bethought hym that tyde
    What hym was beste, and to hym sterte,
    In at the throte his honde he gerte,
    And hente out the herte with his honde,
    Lounge and all that he there fonde.
    The lyon fell deed to the grounde:
    Rycharde felte no wem[511], ne wounde.
    He fell on his knees on that place,
    And thanked Jesu of his grace."
           *       *       *       *       *

What follows is not so well, and therefore I shall extract no more
of this poem.--For the above feat the author tells us, the king was
deservedly called

                  "Stronge Rycharde Cure de Lyowne."

That distich which Shakespeare puts in the mouth of his madman in _K.
Lear_, act iii. sc. 4.

    "Mice and Rats and such small deere
    Have been Tom's food for seven long yeare,"

has excited the attention of the critics. Instead of _deere_, one
of them would substitute _geer_; and another _cheer_[512]. But the
ancient reading is established by the old romance of Sir Bevis, which
Shakespeare had doubtless often heard sung to the harp. This distich is
part of a description there given of the hardships suffered by Bevis,
when confined for seven years in a dungeon:

    "Rattes and myse and such small dere
    Was his meate that seven yere."--Sign. F. iii.

III. In different parts of this work, the reader will find various
extracts from these old poetical legends; to which I refer him for
farther examples of their style and metre. To complete this subject,
it will be proper at least to give one specimen of their skill in
distributing and conducting their fable, by which it will be seen that
nature and common sense had supplied to these old simple bards the want
of critical art, and taught them some of the most essential rules of
epic poetry.--I shall select the romance of _Libius Disconius_[513],
as being one of those mentioned by Chaucer, and either shorter or more
intelligible than the others he has quoted.

If an epic poem may be defined,[514] "A fable related by a poet, to
excite admiration, and inspire virtue, by representing the action of
some one hero, favoured by heaven, who executes a great design, in
spite of all the obstacles that oppose him:" I know not why we should
withold the name of Epic Poem from the piece which I am about to
analyse.

My copy is divided into IX. Parts or Cantos, the several arguments of
which are as follows.


PART I.

Opens with a short exordium to bespeak attention: the hero is
described; a natural son of Sir Gawain a celebrated knight of king
Arthur's court, who being brought up in a forest by his mother, is
kept ignorant of his name and descent. He early exhibits marks of
his courage, by killing a knight in single combat, who encountered
him as he was hunting. This inspires him with a desire of seeking
adventures: therefore cloathing himself in his enemy's armour, he goes
to K. Arthur's court, to request the order of knighthood. His request
granted, he obtains a promise of having the first adventure assigned
him that shall offer.--A damsel named Ellen, attended by a dwarf, comes
to implore K. Arthur's assistance, to rescue a young princess, "the
Lady of Sinadone" their mistress, who is detained from her rights, and
confined in prison. The adventure is claimed by the young knight Sir
Lybius: the king assents; the messengers are dissatisfied, and object
to his youth; but are forced to acquiesce. And here the first book
closes with a description of the ceremony of equipping him forth.


PART II.

Sir Lybius sets out on the adventure: he is derided by the dwarf and
the damsel on account of his youth: they come to the bridge of Perill,
which none can pass without encountering a knight called William de
la Braunch. Sir Lybius is challenged: they just with their spears:
De la Braunch is dismounted: the battle is renewed on foot: Sir
William's sword breaks: he yields. Sir Lybius makes him swear to go
and present himself to K. Arthur, as the first-fruits of his valour.
The conquered knight sets out for K. Arthur's court: is met by three
knights, his kinsmen; who, informed of his disgrace, vow revenge, and
pursue the conqueror. The next day they overtake him: the eldest of
the three attacks Sir Lybius; but is overthrown to the ground. The
two other brothers assault him: Sir Lybius is wounded; yet cuts off
the second brother's arm: the third yields; Sir Lybius sends them all
to K. Arthur. In the third evening he is awaked by the dwarf, who has
discovered a fire in the wood.


PART III.

Sir Lybius arms himself, and leaps on horseback: he finds two giants
roasting a wild boar, who have a fair lady their captive. Sir Lybius,
by favour of the night, runs one of them through with his spear: is
assaulted by the other: a fierce battle ensues: he cuts off the giant's
arm, and at length his head. The rescued lady (an Earl's daughter)
tells him her story; and leads him to her father's castle; who
entertains him with a great feast; and presents him at parting with a
suit of armour and a steed. He sends the giant's head to K. Arthur.


PART IV.

Sir Lybius, maid Ellen, and the dwarf, renew their journey: they see a
castle stuck round with human heads; and are informed it belongs to a
knight called Sir Gefferon, who, in honour of his lemman or mistress,
challenges all comers: He that can produce a fairer lady, is to be
rewarded with a milk-white faulcon, but if overcome, to lose his head.
Sir Lybius spends the night in the adjoining town: In the morning goes
to challenge the faulcon. The knights exchange their gloves: they
agree to just in the market place: the lady and maid Ellen are placed
aloft in chairs: their dresses: the superior beauty of Sir Gefferon's
mistress described: the ceremonies previous to the combat. They engage:
the combat described at large: Sir Gefferon is incurably hurt; and
carried home on his shield. Sir Lybius sends the faulcon to K. Arthur;
and receives back a large present in florins. He stays 40 days to be
cured of his wounds, which he spends in feasting with the neighbouring
lords.


PART V.

Sir Lybius proceeds for Sinadone: in the forest he meets a knight
hunting, called Sir Otes de Lisle: maid Ellen charmed with a very
beautiful dog, begs Sir Lybius to bestow him upon her: Sir Otes meets
them, and claims his dog: is refused: being unarmed he rides to his
castle, and summons his followers: they go in quest of Sir Lybius: a
battle ensues: he is still victorious, and forces Sir Otes to follow
the other conquered knights to K. Arthur.


PART VI.

Sir Lybius comes to a fair city and castle by a riverside, beset round
with pavilions or tents: he is informed, in the castle is a beautiful
lady besieged by a giant named Maugys, who keeps the bridge, and will
let none pass without doing him homage: this Lybius refuses: a battle
ensues: the giant described: the several incidents of the battle; which
lasts a whole summer's day; the giant is wounded: put to flight; slain.
The citizens come out in procession to meet their deliverer: the lady
invites him into her castle: falls in love with him; and seduces him
to her embraces. He forgets the princess of Sinadone, and stays with
this bewitching lady a twelvemonth. This fair sorceress, like another
Alcina, intoxicates him with all kinds of sensual pleasure; and detains
him from the pursuit of honour.


PART VII.

Maid Ellen by chance gets an opportunity of speaking to him; and
upbraids him with his vice and folly: he is filled with remorse,
and escapes the same evening. At length he arrives at the city and
castle of Sinadone: Is given to understand that he must challenge the
constable of the castle to single combat, before he can be received as
a guest. They just: the constable is worsted: Sir Lybius is feasted in
the castle: he declares his intention of delivering their lady; and
inquires the particulars of her history. "Two necromancers have built
a fine palace by sorcery, and there keep her inchanted, till she will
surrender her duchy to them, and yield to such base conditions as they
would impose."


PART VIII.

Early on the morrow Sir Lybius sets out for the inchanted palace.
He alights in the court: enters the hall: the wonders of which are
described in strong Gothic painting. He sits down at the high table: on
a sudden all the lights are quenched: it thunders, and lightens; the
palace shakes; the walls fall in pieces about his ears. He is dismayed
and confounded: but presently hears horses neigh, and is challenged to
single combat by the sorcerers. He gets to his steed: a battle ensues,
with various turns of fortune: he loses his weapon; but gets a sword
from one of the necromancers, and wounds the other with it: the edge of
the sword being secretly poisoned, the wound proves mortal.


PART IX.

He goes up to the surviving sorcerer, who is carried away from him by
inchantment: at length he finds him, and cuts off his head; he returns
to the palace to deliver the lady; but cannot find her: as he is
lamenting, a window opens, through which enters a horrible serpent with
wings and a woman's face: it coils round his neck and kisses him; then
is suddenly converted into a very beautiful lady. She tells him she is
the Lady of Sinadone, and was so inchanted, till she might kiss Sir
Gawain, or some one of his blood: that he has dissolved the charm, and
that herself and her dominions may be his reward. The knight (whose
descent is by this means discovered) joyfully accepts the offer; makes
her his bride, and then sets out with her for King Arthur's court.

Such is the fable of this ancient piece: which the reader may
observe, is as regular in its conduct, as any of the finest poems of
classical antiquity. If the execution, particularly as to the diction
and sentiments, were but equal to the plan, it would be a capital
performance; but this is such as might be expected in rude and ignorant
times, and in barbarous unpolished language.

IV. I shall conclude this prolix account, with a list of such old
metrical romances as are still extant; beginning with those mentioned
by Chaucer.

1. The romance of _Horne Childe_ is preserved in the British Museum,
where it is intitled +þe geste+ kyng Horne. See Catalog.
Harl. MSS. 2253, p. 70. The language is almost Saxon, yet from the
mention in it of Sarazens, it appears to have been written after some
of the Crusades. It begins thus:

    "All heo ben blyþe
    þat to my son[gh] ylyþe:
    A son[gh] ychulle ou sin[gh]
    Of Allof þe [gh]ode kyn[gh]e,"[515] &c.

Another copy of this poem, but greatly altered, and somewhat
modernized, is preserved in the Advocates Library at Edinburgh, in a
MS. quarto volume of old English poetry [W. 4. 1.] Num. XXXIV. in seven
leaves or folios[516], intitled, _Horn-child and Maiden Rinivel_, and
beginning thus:

    "Mi leve frende dere,
    Herken and ye may here."

2. The poem of _Ipotis_ (or _Ypotis_) is preserved in the Cotton
Library, Calig. A. 2, fo. 77, but is rather a religious legend, than a
romance. Its beginning is,

    "He þat wyll of wysdome here
    Herkeneth nowe ye may here
    Of a tale of holy wryte
    Seynt Jon the Evangelyste wytnesseth hyt."

3. The romance of Sir _Guy_ was written before that of Bevis, being
quoted in it[517]. An account of this old poem is given above, p. 107.
To which it may be added, that the two complete copies in MS. are
preserved at Cambridge, the one in the public library[518], the other
in that of Caius College, Class A. 8.--In Ames's Typog. p. 153, may be
seen the first lines of the printed copy.--The first MS. begins,

    "Sythe the tyme that God was borne."

4. _Guy and Colbronde_, an old romance in three parts, is preserved in
the Editor's folio MS. (p. 349.) [printed edition, vol. ii. p. 527.] It
is in stanzas of six lines, the first of which may be seen in vol. ii.
p. 175, beginning thus:

    "When meate and drinke is great plentye."

In the Edinburgh MS. (mentioned above) are two ancient poems on the
subject of _Guy of Warwick_: viz. Num. XVIII. containing 26 leaves, and
XX. 59 leaves. Both these have unfortunately the beginnings wanting,
otherwise they would perhaps be found to be different copies of one or
both the preceding articles.

5. From the same MS. I can add another article to this list, viz. the
romance of _Rembrun_ son of Sir Guy; being Num. XXI. in 9 leaves: this
is properly a continuation of the History of _Guy_: and in Art. 3, the
Hist. of Rembrun follows that of Guy as a necessary part of it. This
Edinburgh romance of Rembrun begins thus:

    "Jesu that erst of mighte most
    Fader and sone and Holy Ghost."

Before I quit the subject of Sir Guy, I must observe, that if we may
believe Dugdale in his _Baronage_ (vol. i. p. 243, col. 2), the fame of
our English Champion had in the time of Henry IV. travelled as far as
the East, and was no less popular among the Sarazens, than here in the
West among the nations of Christendom. In that reign a Lord Beauchamp
travelling to Jerusalem was kindly received by a noble person, the
Soldan's Lieutenant, who hearing he was descended from the famous Guy
of Warwick, "whose story they had in books of their own language,"
invited him to his palace; and royally feasting him, presented him
three precious stones of great value, besides divers cloaths of silk
and gold given to his servants.

6. The romance of _Syr Bevis_ is described in page 216 of this vol. Two
manuscript copies of this poem are extant at Cambridge, viz., in the
public library[519], and in that of Caius Coll. Class A. 9. (5.)--The
first of these begins,

    "Lordyngs lystenyth grete and smale."

There is also a copy of this romance of _Sir Bevis of Hamptoun_, in
the Edinburgh MS. Numb. XXII. consisting of twenty-five leaves, and
beginning thus:

    "Lordinges herkneth to mi tale,
    Is merier than the nightengale."

The printed copies begin different from both, viz.,

    "Lysten, Lordinges, and hold you styl."

7. _Libeaux_ (_Libeaus_, or _Lybius_) _Disconius_ is preserved in the
Editor's folio MS. (page 317) [pr. ed, vol. ii. p. 415], where the
first stanza is,

    "Jesus Christ christen kinge,
    And his mother that sweete thinge,
      Helpe them at their neede,
    That will listen to my tale,
    Of a Knight I will you tell,
      A doughtye man of deede."

An older copy is preserved in the Cotton Library (Calig. A. 2. fol. 40)
but containing such innumerable variations, that it is apparently a
different translation of some old French original, which will account
for the title of _Le Beaux Disconus_, or the Fair Unknown. The first
line is,

    "Jesu Christ our Savyour."

As for _Pleindamour_, or _Blandamoure_, no romance with this title has
been discovered; but as the word _Blaundemere_ occurs in the romance
of _Libius Disconius_, in the Editor's folio MS. p. 319 [pr. ed. vol.
ii. p. 420], he thought the name of _Blandamoure_ (which was in all
the editions of Chaucer he had then seen) might have some reference to
this. But _Pleindamour_, the name restored by Mr. Tyrwhitt, is more
remote.

8. _Le Morte Arthure_ is among the Harl. MSS 2252, § 49. This is judged
to be a translation from the French; Mr. Wanley thinks it no older than
the time of Henry VII., but it seems to be quoted in Syr Bevis, (Sign.
K. ij. b.) It begins,

    "Lordinges, that are lesse and deare."

In the library of Bennet Coll. Cambridge, No. 351, is a MS. intitled in
the catalogue _Acta Arthuris Metrico Anglicano_, but I know not its
contents.

9. In the Editor's folio MS. are many songs and romances about King
Arthur and his knights, some of which are very imperfect, as _King
Arthur and the King of Cornwall_ (page 24) [pr. ed. vol. i. p. 61],
in stanzas of four lines, beginning,

    "'Come here,' my cozen Gawaine so gay."

_The Turke and Gawain_ (p. 38) [pr. ed. vol. i. p. 90], in stanzas of
six lines beginning thus:

    "Listen lords great and small,"[520]

but these are so imperfect that I do not make distinct articles of
them. See also in this volume, Book I. No. I., II., IV., V.

In the same MS. p. 203 [pr. ed. vol. ii. p. 58], is the _Greene
Knight_, in two parts, relating a curious adventure of Sir Gawain, in
stanzas of six lines, beginning thus:--

    "List: wen Arthur he was k:"

10. _The Carle of Carlisle_ is another romantic tale about Sir Gawain,
in the same MS. p. 448 [pr. ed. vol. iii. p. 277], in distichs:

    "Listen: to me a litle stond."

In all these old poems the same set of knights are always represented
with the same manners and characters; which seem to have been as
well known, and as distinctly marked among our ancestors, as Homer's
Heroes were among the Greeks: for, as _Ulysses_ is always represented
crafty, _Achilles_ irascible, and _Ajax_ rough; so _Sir Gawain_ is
ever courteous and gentle, _Sir Kay_ rugged and disobliging, &c. "_Sir
Gawain with his olde curtesie_" is mentioned by Chaucer as noted to a
proverb, in his _Squire's Tale_. _Canterb. Tales_, vol. ii. p. 104.

11. _Syr Launfal_, an excellent old romance concerning another of King
Arthur's knights, is preserved in the Cotton Library, Calig. A 2, f.
33. This is a translation from the French[521], made by one _Thomas_
_Chestre_, who is supposed to have lived in the reign of Henry VI. (See
Tanner's Biblioth.) It is in stanzas of six lines, and begins,

    "Be douyty Artours dawes."

The above was afterwards altered by some minstrel into the romance
of _Sir Lambewell_, in three parts, under which title it was more
generally known[522]. This is the Editor's folio MS. p. 60 [pr. ed.
vol. i. p. 144], beginning thus:

    "Doughty in king Arthures dayes."

12. _Eger and Grime_, in six parts (in the Editor's folio MS. p. 124)
[pr. ed. vol. i. p. 354], is a well invented tale of chivalry, scarce
inferior to any of Ariosto's. This which was inadvertently omitted in
the former editions of this list, is in distichs, and begins thus:

    "It fell sometimes in the Land of Beame."

13. The romance of _Merline_, in nine parts (preserved in the same
folio MS. p. 145 [pr. ed. vol. i. p. 422]), gives a curious account
of the birth, parentage, and juvenile adventures of this famous
British Prophet. In this poem the _Saxons_ are called _Sarazens_; and
the thrusting the rebel angels out of heaven is attributed to "_oure
Lady_." It is in distichs and begins thus:

    "He that made with his hand."

There is an old romance _Of Arthour and of Merlin_, in the Edinburgh
MS. of old English poems: I know not whether it has anything in common
with this last mentioned. It is in the volume numbered xxiii. and
extends through fifty-five leaves. The two first lines are:

    "Jesu Crist, heven king
    Al ous graunt gode ending."

14. _Sir Isenbras_ (or as it is in the MS. copies, _Sir Isumbras_),
is quoted in Chaucer's _R. of Thopas_, v. 6. Among Mr. Garrick's old
plays is a printed copy; of which an account has been already given
in vol. i. book iii. No. vii. It is preserved in MS. in the Library
of Caius Coll. Camb., Class A. 9 (2), and also in the Cotton Library,
Calig. A. 12 (f. 128). This is extremely different from the printed
copy. E.g.

    "God þat made both erþe and hevene."

15. _Emarè_, a very curious and ancient romance, is preserved in the
same vol. of the Cotton Library, f. 69. It is in stanzas of six lines,
and begins thus:

    "Jesu þat ys kyng in trone."

16. _Chevelere assigne_, or The Knight of the Swan, preserved in the
Cotton Library, has been already described in vol. ii. Appendix, _Essay
on P. Plowman's Metre_, &c., as hath also

17. _The Sege of F[=e][=r]lam_ (or Jerusalem), which seems to have been
written after the other, and may not improperly be classed among the
romances; as may also the following, which is preserved in the same
volume, viz.,

18. _Owaine Myles_ (fol. 90), giving an account of the wonders of St.
Patrick's Purgatory. This is a translation into verse of the story
related in Mat. Paris's _Hist._ (sub. Ann. 1153.) It is in distichs
beginning thus:

    "God þat ys so full of myght."

In the same manuscript are three or four other narrative poems, which
might be reckoned among the romances, but being rather religious
legends, I shall barely mention them; as _Tundale_, f. 17; _Trentale_
_Sci Gregorii_, f. 84; _Jerome_, f. 133; _Eustache_, f. 136.

19. _Octavian imperator_, an ancient romance of chivalry, is in the
same vol. of the Cotton Library, f. 20. Notwithstanding the name, this
old poem has nothing in common with the history of the Roman Emperors.
It is in a very peculiar kind of stanza, whereof 1, 2, 3, & 5 rhyme
together, as do the 4 and 6. It begins thus:

    "Ihesu þat was with spere ystonge."

In the public library at Cambridge[523], is a poem with the same title,
and begins very differently:

    "Lyttyll and mykyll, olde and yonge."

20. _Eglamour of Artas_ (or _Artoys_) is preserved in the same vol.
with the foregoing, both in the Cotton Library and Public Library at
Cambridge. It is also in the Editor's folio MS. p. 295 [pr. ed. vol.
ii. p. 341], where it is divided into six parts. A printed copy in the
Bodleian Library, C. 39. Art. Seld., and also among Mr. Garrick's old
plays, K. vol. x. It is in distichs, and begins thus:

    "Ihesu Crist of heven kyng."

21. _Syr Triamore_ (in stanzas of six lines) is preserved in MS. in the
Editor's volume, p. 210 [pr. ed. vol. ii. p. 80], and in the Public
Library at Cambridge (690, § 29. Vid. Cat. MSS. p. 394.) Two printed
copies are extant in the Bodleian Library, and among Mr. Garrick's
plays in the same volumes with the last article. Both the editor's MS.
and the printed copy begin,

    "Nowe Jesu Chryste our heven kynge."

The Cambridge copy thus:

    "Heven blys that all shall wynne."

22. _Sir Degree_ (_Degare_, or _Degore_, which last seems the true
title) in five parts, in distichs, is preserved in the Editor's folio
MS. p. 371 [pr. ed. vol. iii. p. 20], and in the Public Library at
Cambridge (ubi supra). A printed copy is in the Bod. Library C. 39.
Art. Seld. and among Mr. Garrick's plays, K. vol. ix. The Editor's MS.
and the printed copies begin,

    "Lordinges, and you wyl holde you styl."

The Cambridge MS. has it,

    "Lystenyth, lordyngis, gente and fre."

23. _Ipomydon_ (or _Chylde Ipomydon_), is preserved among the Harl.
MSS. 2252 (44). It is in distichs, and begins,

    "Mekely, lordyngis, gentylle and fre."

In the library of Lincoln Cathedral, K k. 3, 10, is an old imperfect
printed copy, wanting the whole first sheet A.

24. _The Squyr of Lowe degre_, is one of those burlesqued by Chaucer in
his Rhyme of Thopas[524]. Mr. Garrick has a printed copy of this, among
his old plays, K. vol. ix. It begins,

    "It was a squyer of lowe degre,
    That loved the kings daughter of Hungre."

25. _Historye of K. Richard Cure [C[oe]ur] de Lyon._ (Impr. W. de
Worde, 1528, 4to.) is preserved in the Bodleian Library, C. 39, Art.
Selden. A fragment of it is also remaining in the Edinburgh MS. of old
English poems; No. xxxvi. in two leaves. A large extract from this
romance has been given already above, p. 356. Richard was the peculiar
patron of Chivalry, and favourite of the old minstrels and troubadours.
See Warton's _Observ._ vol. i. p. 29, vol. ii. p. 40.

26. Of the following I have only seen No. 27, but I believe they may
all be referred to the class of romances.

The _Knight of Courtesy and the Lady of Faguel_ (Bod. Lib. C. 39. Art.
Sheld. a printed copy). This Mr. Warton thinks is the story of Coucy's
Heart, related in Fauchet, and in Howel's Letters. (v. i. s. 6, L. 20,
see Wart. _Obs._ v. ii. p. 40). The Editor has seen a very beautiful
old ballad on this subject in French.

27. The four following are all preserved in the MS. so often referred
to in the Public Library at Cambridge, (690. Appendix to Bp. More's
MSS. in Cat. MSS. tom. ii. p. 394), viz., _The Lay of Erle of
Tholouse_ (No. 27), of which the Editor hath also a copy from "Cod.
MSS. Mus. Ashmol. Oxon." The first line of both is,

    "Jesu Chryste in Trynyte."

28. _Roberd Kynge of Cysyll_ (or Sicily) shewing the fall of pride. Of
this there is also a copy among the Harl. MSS. 1703 (3). The Cambridge
MS. begins,

    "Princis that be prowde in prese."

29. _Le bone Florence of Rome_, beginning thus:

    "As ferre as men ride or gone."

30. _Dioclesian the Emperour_, beginning,

    "Sum tyme ther was a noble man."

31. The two knightly brothers _Amys and Amelion_ (among the Harl MSS.
2386, §. 42) is an old romance of chivalry, as is also, I believe,
the fragment of the _Lady Belesant, the Duke of Lombardy's fair_
_daughter_, mentioned in the same article. See the catalog. vol. ii.

32. In the Edinburgh MS. so often referred to (preserved in the
Advocates Library, W. 4. i.) might probably be found some other
articles to add to this list, as well as other copies of some of the
pieces mentioned in it, for the whole volume contains not fewer than
thirty-seven poems or romances, some of them very long. But as many of
them have lost the beginnings, which have been cut out for the sake of
the illuminations, and as I have not had an opportunity of examining
the MS. myself, I shall be content to mention only the articles that
follow[525]: viz.

An old romance about _Rouland_ (not I believe the famous Paladine, but
a champion named _Rouland Louth_; query) being in the volume, No.
xxvii. in five leaves, and wants the beginning.

33. Another romance that seems to be a kind of continuation of this
last, intitled, _Otuel a Knight_, (No. xxviii. in eleven leaves and a
half). The two first lines are,

    "Herkneth both yinge and old,
    That willen heren of battailes bold."

34. _The King of Tars_ (No. iv. in five leaves and a half; it is also
in the Bodleyan Library, MS. Vernon, f. 304) beginning thus:

    "Herkneth to me bothe eld and ying
    For Maries love that swete thing."

35. A tale or romance (No. i. two leaves), that wants both beginning
and end. The first lines now remaining are,

    "Th Erl him graunted his will y-wis. that the knicht him haden y told.
    The Baronnis that were of mikle pris. befor him thay weren y-cald."

36. Another mutilated tale or romance (No. iii. four leaves). The first
lines at present are,

    "To Mr. Steward wil y gon.  and tellen him the sothe of the
    Reseyved bestow sone anon.  gif you will serve and with hir be."

37. A mutilated tale or romance (No. xi. in thirteen leaves). The two
first lines that occur are,

    "That riche Dooke his fest gan hold
    With Erls and with Baronns bold."

I cannot conclude my account of this curious manuscript, without
acknowledging that I was indebted to the friendship of the Rev. Dr.
Blair, the ingenious professor of Belles Lettres, in the University
of Edinburgh, for whatever I learned of its contents, and for the
important additions it enabled me to make to the foregoing list.

To the preceding articles two ancient metrical romances in the Scottish
dialect may now be added, which are published in Pinkerton's _Scottish
Poems_, reprinted "from scarce editions," Lond. 1792, in 3 vols. 8vo.
viz.

38. _Gawan and Gologras_, a metrical romance; from an edition printed
at Edinburgh, 1508, 8vo. beginning:--

    "In the tyme of Arthur, as trew men me tald."

It is in stanzas of thirteen lines.

39. _Sir Gawan and Sir Galaron of Galloway_, a metrical romance, in the
same stanzas as No. 38, from an ancient MS. beginning thus:

    "In the tyme of Arthur an aunter[526] betydde
    By the Turnwathelan, as the boke tells;
    Whan he to Carlele was comen, and conqueror kyd," &c.

Both these (which exhibit the union of the old alliterative metre, with
rhyme, &c., and in the termination of each stanza the short triplets
of the Turnament of Tottenham), are judged to be as old as the time of
our K. Henry VI., being apparently the production of an old poet, thus
mentioned by Dunbar, in his _Lament for the Deth of the Makkaris_:

    "Clerk of Tranent eik he hes take,
    That made the aventers of Sir Gawane."

It will scarce be necessary to remind the reader, that _Turnewathelan_
is evidently _Tearne-Wadling_, celebrated in the old ballad of the
_Marriage of Sir Gawaine_. See pp. 14 and 325 of this volume.

Many new references, and perhaps some additional articles might be
added to the foregoing list from Mr. Warton's _History of English
Poetry_, 3 vols. 4to. and from the notes to Mr. Tyrwhitt's improved
edition of _Chaucer's Canterbury Tales_, &c. in 5 vols. 8vo. which have
been published since this Essay, &c. was first composed; but it will be
sufficient once for all to refer the curious reader to those popular
works.

The reader will also see many interesting particulars on the subject of
these volumes, as well as on most points of general literature, in Sir
John Hawkins's curious _History of Music_, &c., in 5 volumes, 4to., as
also in Dr. Burney's _Hist._ &c. in 4 vols. 4to.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [Much has been written upon the subject of this Essay since
  Percy's time, but no exhaustive work has yet appeared. The reader
  may consult W. C. Hazlitt's new edition of Warton's _History_,
  1871; Ellis's _Specimens of Early English Metrical Romances_, new
  edition, by J. O. Halliwell, 1848; Dunlop's _History of Fiction_;
  J. M. Ludlow's _Popular Epics of the Middle Ages, Norse, German,
  and Carlovingian Cycles_, 1865; G. W. Cox and E. H. Jones's
  _Popular Romances of the Middle Ages_, 1871; and also the prefaces
  of the various old English romances printed by the Percy, Camden,
  and Early English Text Societies; and by the Abbotsford, Bannatyne,
  and Roxburghe Clubs.]

FOOTNOTES:

[465] Vid. _Lasiteau, Moeurs de Sauvages_, t. ii. Dr. Browne's _Hist._
_of the Rise and Progress of Poetry_.

[466] "Germani celebrant carminibus antiquis (quod unum apud illos
memoriæ et annalium genus est) Tuistonem," &c. _Tacit. Germ._ c. ii.

[467] _Barth. Antiq. Dan._ lib. i. cap. x. _Wormii Literatura Runica_,
ad finem.

[468] See _Northern Antiquities, or a Description of the Manners,_
_Customs, &c., of the ancient Danes and other Northern Nations,_
_translated from the Fr. of M. Mallet_, 1770, 2 vols. 8vo. (vol. i. p.
49, &c.)

[469] _Vid. infra_, pp. 341, 342, &c.

[470] Viz. _Astræa_, _Cassandra_, _Clelia_, &c.

[471] Mallet, vid. _Northern Antiquities_, vol. i. p. 318, &c.; vol.
ii. p. 234, &c.

[472] _Letters concerning Chivalry_, 8vo. 1763.

[473] Mallet.

[474] Mallet.

[475] The seeds of chivalry sprung up so naturally out of the original
manners and opinions of the northern nations, that it is not credible
they arose so late as after the establishment of the Feudal System,
much less the Crusades. Nor, again, that the romances of chivalry
were transmitted to other nations, through the Spaniards, from the
Moors and Arabians. Had this been the case the first French romances
of chivalry would have been on Moorish, or at least Spanish subjects:
whereas the most ancient stories of this kind, whether in prose or
verse, whether in Italian, French, English, &c., are chiefly on the
subjects of Charlemagne and the Paladins, or of our British Arthur
and his Knights of the Round Table, &c., being evidently borrowed
from the fabulous chronicles of the supposed Archbishop Turpin and of
Jeffery of Monmouth. Not but some of the oldest and most popular French
romances are also on Norman subjects, as _Richard Sans-peur_, _Robert
le Diable_, &c., whereas I do not recollect so much as one in which
the scene is laid in Spain, much less among the Moors, or descriptive
of Mahometan manners. Even in _Amadis de Gaul_, said to have been the
first romance printed in Spain, the scene is laid in Gaul and Britain;
and the manners are French: which plainly shews from what school this
species of fabling was learnt and transmitted to the southern nations
of Europe.

[476] Mallet. _North. Antiquities_, vol. i. p. 36; vol. ii. _passim_.

[477] _Olaus Verelius, Herv. Saga_, pp. 44, 45. Hickes's _Thesaur._
vol. ii. p. 311. _Northern Antiquities_, vol. ii. _passim_.

[478] _Ibid._ vol. i. pp. 69, 374, &c.; vol. ii. p. 216, &c.

[479] Rollof's _Saga_, c. 35, &c.

[480] It is peculiarly unfortunate that such as maintain this opinion
are obliged to take their first step from the Moorish provinces in
Spain, without one intermediate resting place, to Armorica or Bretagne,
the province in France from them most remote, not more in situation
than in the manners, habits, and language of its Welsh inhabitants,
which are allowed to have been derived from this island, as must
have been their traditions, songs, and fables; being doubtless all
of Celtic original. See p. 3 of the _Dissertation on the Origin of
Romantic Fiction in Europe_, prefixed to Mr. Tho. Warton's _History of
English Poetry_, vol. i. 1774, 4to. If any pen could have supported
this darling hypothesis of Dr. Warburton that of this ingenious critic
would have effected it. But under the general term Oriental, he seems
to consider the ancient inhabitants of the north and the south of Asia,
as having all the same manners, traditions, and fables; and because
the secluded people of Arabia took the lead under the religion and
empire of Mahomet, therefore everything must be derived from them to
the Northern Asiatics in the remotest ages, &c. With as much reason
under the word Occidental, we might represent the early traditions and
fables of the north and south of Europe to have been the same; and that
the Gothic mythology of Scandinavia, the Druidic or Celtic of Gaul and
Britain, differed not from the classic of Greece and Rome.

There is not room here for a full examination of the minuter arguments,
or rather slight coincidences, by which our agreeable dissertator
endeavours to maintain and defend this favourite opinion of Dr. W.,
who has been himself so completely confuted by Mr. Tyrwhitt. (See his
notes on _Love's Labour Lost_, &c.) But some of his positions it will
be sufficient to mention: such as the referring the Gog and Magog,
which our old Christian bards might have had from Scripture, to the
_Jaguiouge_ and _Magiouge_ of the Arabians and Persians, &c. (p. 13).
That "we may venture to affirm that this (Geoffrey of Monmouth's)
Chronicle, supposed to contain the ideas of the Welsh bards, entirely
consists of Arabian inventions" (p. 13). And that, "as Geoffrey's
history is the grand repository of the acts of Arthur, so a fabulous
history ascribed to Turpin is the groundwork of all the chimerical
legends which have been related concerning the conquests of Charlemagne
and his twelve peers. Its subject is the expulsion of the Saracens
from Spain, and it is filled with fictions evidently congenial to
those which characterize Geoffrey's History" (p. 17). That is, as he
afterwards expresses it, "lavishly decorated by the Arabian fablers"
(p. 58). We should hardly have expected that the Arabian fablers
would have been lavish in decorating a history of their enemy: but
what is singular, as an instance and proof of this Arabian origin of
the fictions of Turpin, a passage is quoted from his fourth chapter,
which I shall beg leave to offer, as affording decisive evidence,
that they could not possibly be derived from a Mahometan source. Sc.
"The Christians under Charlemagne are said to have found in Spain a
golden idol, or image of Mahomet, as high as a bird can fly--it was
framed by Mahomet himself of the purest metal, who, by his knowledge in
necromancy, had sealed up within it a legion of diabolical spirits. It
held in its hand a prodigious club; and the Saracens had a prophetic
tradition, that this club should fall from the hand of the image in
that year when a certain king should be born in France, &c." (_vid._ p.
18, note.)

[481] The little narrative songs on Morisco subjects, which the
Spaniards have at present in great abundance, and which they call
peculiarly _romances_, (see vol. i. book iii. no. xvi. &c.), have
nothing in common with their proper romances (or histories) of
chivalry, which they call _Historias de Cavallerias_; these are
evidently imitations of the French, and shew a great ignorance of
Moorish manners: and with regard to the Morisco, or song _romances_,
they do not seem of very great antiquity; few of them appear, from
their subjects, much earlier than the reduction of Granada, in the
fifteenth century: from which period, I believe, may be plainly traced
among the Spanish writers, a more perfect knowledge of Moorish customs,
&c.

[482] See _Northern Antiquities_, passim.

[483] _Ibid._

[484] _Saxon Gram._ p. 152, 153. Mallet, _North. Antiq._ vol. i. p. 321.

[485] See a translation of this poem, among _Five pieces of Runic_
_Poetry_, printed for Dodsley, 1764, 8vo.

[486] _Vid._ Mallet, _Northern Antiquities_, passim.

[487] The editor's MS. contains a multitude of poems of this latter
kind. It was probably from this custom of the minstrels that some
of our first historians wrote their chronicles in verse, as Rob. of
Gloucester, Harding, &c.

[488] See a specimen in 2d vol. of _Northern Antiquities_, &c., p. 248,
&c.

[489] _Eccardi Hist. Stud. Etym._ 1711, p. 179, &c. Hickes's _Thesaur._
vol. ii. p. 314.

[490] _i.e._ Northern men, being chiefly emigrants from Norway,
Denmark, &c.

[491] See the account of Taillefer in vol. i. Essay, and Note.

[492] "Ipsa Carmina memoriæ mandabant, & prælia inituri decantabant;
qua memoriâ tam fortium gestorum a majoribus patratorum ad imitationem
animus adderetur."--_Jornandes de Gothis._

[493] _Eginhartus de Carolo magno._ "Item barbara, & antiquissima
carmina, quibus veterum regum actus & bella canebantur, scripsit."--c.
29.

_Asserius de Ælfredo magno._ "Rex inter bella, &c.... Saxonicos
libros recitare, & _maxime carmina Saxonica_ memoriter discere,
aliis imperare, & solus assidue pro viribus, studiosissime non
desinebat."--Ed. 1722, 8vo. p. 43.

[494] See above, pp. 340, 347.

[495] The romances on the subject of Perceval, San Graal, Lancelot du
Lac, Tristan, &c., were among the first that appeared in the French
language in prose, yet these were originally composed in metre: the
editor has in his possession a very old French MS. in verse, containing
_L'ancien Roman de Perceval_, and metrical copies of the others may be
found in the libraries of the curious. See a note of Wanley's in _Harl.
Catalog. Num._ 2252, p. 49, &c. Nicholson's _Eng. Hist. Library_, 3rd
ed. p. 91, &c. See also a curious collection of old French romances,
with Mr. Wanley's account of this sort of pieces, in _Harl. MSS.
Catal._ 978, 106.

[496] The author of the _Essay on the Genius of Pope_, p. 282.

[497] _Ibid._ p. 283. _Hist. Lit._ tom. 6, 7.

[498] _Voir Preface aux_ "Fabliaux & Contes des Poetes François des
xii. xiii. xiv. & xv. siècles, &c., Paris, 1756, 3 tom. 12mo." (a very
curious work).

[499] _Vid. supra_, note (d), vol. i. Essay, &c. _Et vide_ Rapin,
Carte, &c. This song of _Roland_ (whatever it was) continued for some
centuries to be usually sung by the French in their marches, if we may
believe a modern French writer. "Un jour qu'on chantoit la _Chanson de
Roland_, comme c'etoit l'usage dans les marches. Il y a long temps, dit
il (John K. of France, who died in 1364), qu'on ne voit plus de Rolands
parmi les François. On y verroit encore des Rolands, lui répondit un
vieux capitaine, s'ils avoient un Charlemagne à leur tête." _Vid._
tom. iii. p. 202, _des Essaies Hist. sur Paris, de M. de Saintefoix_:
who gives as his authority, Boethius in _Hist. Scotorum_. This author,
however, speaks of the complaint and repartee, as made in an Assembly
of the States (_vocato senatu_), and not upon any march, &c. _Vid._
Boeth. lib. xv. vol. 327. Ed. Paris, 1574.

[500] See on this subject, vol. i. note, s. 2, p. 404; and in note G g,
p. 424, &c.

[501] The first romances of chivalry among the Germans were in metre:
they have some very ancient narrative songs (which they call _Lieder_)
not only on the fabulous heroes of their own country, but also on those
of France and Britain, as Tristram, Arthur, Gawain, and the knights
_von der Tafel-ronde_ (_vid._ Goldasti Not. in _Eginhart. Vit. Car.
Mag._ 4to. 1711, p. 207.)

[502] The Welsh have still some very old romances about K. Arthur; but
as these are in prose, they are not probably their first pieces that
were composed on that subject.

[503] It is most credible that these stories were originally of English
invention, even if the only pieces now extant should be found to be
translations from the French. What now pass for the French originals
were probably only amplifications, or enlargements of the old English
story. That the French romances borrowed some things from the English,
appears from the word _termagant_.

[504] _Recuyel of the Hystoryes of Troy_, 1471; _Godfroye of Boloyne_,
1481; _Le Morte de Arthur_, 1485; _The Life of Charlemagne_, 1485, &c.
As the old minstrelsy wore out, prose books of chivalry became more
admired, especially after the Spanish romances began to be translated
into English towards the end of Q. Elizabeth's reign: then the most
popular metrical romances began to be reduced into prose, as _Sir Guy_,
_Bevis_, &c.

[505] See extract from a letter, written by the editor of these
volumes, in Mr. Warton's _Observations_, vol. ii. p. 139.

[506] _Canterbury Tales_ (Tyrwhitt's edit.), vol. ii. p. 238. In all
the former editions which I have seen the name at the end of the fourth
line is _Blandamoure_.

[507] Dr. Grey has shewn that the same story is alluded to in Rastell's
_Chronicle_: as it was doubtless originally had from the romance,
this is proof that the old metrical romances throw light on our first
writers in prose: many of our ancient historians have recorded the
fictions of romance.

[508] _i.e._ handkerchiefs. Here we have the etymology of the word,
viz. "_Couvre le Chef_."

[509] _i.e._ slipt aside.

[510] _i.e._ yawned.

[511] _i.e._ hurt.

[512] Dr. Warburton.--Dr. Grey.

[513] So it is intitled in the editor's MS. But the true title is _Le_
_Beaux Disconus_, or the Fair Unknown. See a note on the _Canterbury_
_Tales_, vol. iv. p. 333.

[514] Vid. _Discours sur la Poesie Epique_, prefixed to _Télémaque_.

[515] _i.e._ May all they be blithe that to my song listen: A song I
shall you sing, Of Allof the good king, &c.

[516] In each full page of this volume are forty-four lines, when the
poem is in long metre: and eighty-eight when the metre is short, and
the page in two columns.

[517] Sign. K. 2. b.

[518] For this and most of the following, which are mentioned as
preserved in the Public Library, I refer the reader to the _Oxon_
_Catalogue of MSS._, 1697, vol. ii p. 394; in Appendix to Bp. More's
MSS. No. 690, 33, since given to the University of Cambridge.

[519] No. 690, § 31. Vid. _Catalog. MSS._ p. 394.

[520] In the former editions, after the above, followed mention of a
fragment in the same MS., intitled, _Sir Lionel_, in distichs (p. 32)
[pr. ed. vol. i. p. 75]; but this being only a short ballad, and not
relating to K. Arthur, is here omitted.

[521] The French original is preserved among the Harl. MSS. No. 978, §
112, _Lanval_.

[522] See Laneham's _Letter concern. Q. Eliz. entertainment at_
_Killingworth_, 1575, 12mo. p. 34.

[523] No. 690. (30.) _Vid. Oxon Catalog. MSS._ p. 394.

[524] This is alluded to by Shakespeare in his _Hen. V._ (Act v.),
where Fluellyn tells Pistol, he will make him a squire of low degree,
when he means, to knock him down.

[525] Some of these I give, though mutilated and divested of their
titles, because they may enable a curious inquirer to complete or
improve other copies.

[526] _i.e._ adventure.

[Illustration]




GLOSSARY

TO THE THREE VOLUMES.

This is an amalgamation of the three original glossaries, with large
additions and alterations, and the introduction of references. It has
not, however, been thought necessary to refer to every passage in which
a particular word may occur.

Percy's explanatory notes are marked with the letter P.

Many words which appear in a slightly varied form from the present
spelling are not included in this glossary.


  A', _all_.

  A, _at_.

  A, i. 27, _of_. Watter a Twyde, i. 25, _water of Tweed_.

  Abacke, _back_.

  Abenche, i. 409, _on a bench_.

  Able, i. 87, _fit_, _suitable_.

  Abone, i. 24;
    aboon, i. 323;
    aboone, i. 101;
    aboun, i. 32, _above_.

  Aboven ous, ii. 8, _above us_.

  Abowght, i. 40, _about_.

  Abraide, i. 168, _abroad_.

  Abuve, ii. 83, _in the uplands_.

  Abye, iii. 31, _suffer_, _pay for_, _expiate_.

  Acton, i. 72, _a quilted leather jacket, worn under the coat of
    mail_. Fr. hacqueton.

  Advoutry, ii. 136, _adultery_.

  Aff, ii. 70, _off_.

  Affore, i. 269;
    afore, ii. 115, _before_.

  Aft, i. 321, _oft_.

  Agayne, i. 121, _against_.

  Ageyn, i. 119, _against_.

  Agone, ii. 41, _gone_.

  Ahte, ii. 11, _ought_.

  Aik, iii. 147, _oak_.

  Ail, ii. 84, _trouble_.

  Ain, i. 102, _own_.

  Aith, ii. 70, _oath_.

  Al, ii. 9, _albeit_, _although_.

  Al gife, _although_.

  Alace, iii. 236, _alas_.

  Alane, ii. 83, _alone_.

  Alemaigne, ii. 7, _Germany_.

  Allgyf, i. 125, _although_.

  Almaine, iii. 110, _Germany_.

  Alyes, ii. 33, _always_.

  Amang, ii. 20, _among_.

  Amangis, ii. 81, _amongst_.

  Amblit, iii. 237, _ambled_.

  Among, ii. 35, _at intervals_, _sometimes_.

  An, _and_.

  An, i, 60, _if_.

  Ancyent, i. 271, _flag_, _banner_, _standard_.

  And, _if_, but and, i. 27;
    _but if_;
    and youe, _if you_.

  And but, ii. 15, _and unless_.

  Ane, i. 30, ii. 118, _one_, _an_, _a_.

  Anes, ii. 112, _once_, ii. 109. (?)

  Angel, ii. 176, _a gold coin varying in value from 6s. 8d. to 10s._

  Ann, ii. 69, _if_.

  Anneuche, ii. 81, _enough_.

  Annoy, ii. 211, _trouble_.

  Ant, ii. 7, _and_.

  Aplyht, al aplyht, ii. 14, _entirely_.

  Aquoy, iii. 247, _coy_, _shy_.

  Ar, ii. 24, _are_.

  Aras, i. 24, _arrows_.

  Archeborde, ii. 193, 203, _side of the ship?_ See Hach-borde.

  Arcir, i. 103, _archer_.

  Argabushe, ii. 53, _harquebuse, an old-fashioned kind of musket_.

  Arrand, i. 80, _errand_.

  Arros, i. 28, _arrows_.

  Ase, ii. 8, _as_.

  Aslake, ii. 37, _abate_.

  Assay, i. 80, _essay_, assayed, ii. 44.

  Assoyld, i. 179, _absolved_.

  Astate, i. 119, _estate_.

  Astonied, iii. 34, _astonished_, _stunned_.

  Astound, i. 207, _stunned_.

  Ath, i. 25, _of the_.

  Att me, i. 207, _from me_.

  Attour, ii. 81;
    attowre, ii. 84, 86, _over_.

  Au, iii. 75, _all_.

  Auld, i. 83, 101, ii. 68, _old_.

  Aule, i. 308, _awl_.

  Aureat, i. 123, _golden_.

  Austerne, i. 285, _stern_, _austere_.

  Avaunce, ii. 49, _advance_.

  Avow, iii. 327;
    avowe, i. 23, 34, 47, 172;
    ii. 23, 58, _vow_.

  Aw, iii. 145, _all_.

  Awa', ii. 69, _away_.

  Awin, ii. 133, _own_.

  Awne, i. 121, 274, _own_.

  Axed, i. 129, _asked_.

  Ay, ii. 70, _ever_;
    also _ah! alas!_

  Ayein, ii. 12, _against_.

  Ayont the ingle, ii. 68, _beyond the fire_. _The fire was in the
    middle of the room_.

  "In the west of Scotland, at this present time, in many cottages,
  they pile their peats and turfs upon stones in the middle of the
  room. There is a hole above the fire in the ridge of the house to
  let the smoke out at. In some places are cottage-houses, from the
  front of which a very wide chimney projects like a bow-window: the
  fire is in a grate, like a malt-kiln grate, round which the people
  sit: sometimes they draw this grate into the middle of the room."
  (Mr. Lambe.) P.

  Ba', i. 59, _ball._

  Bacheleere, i. 64, 78, _knight_;
    bachelary, ii. 28;
    bachelery, ii. 23, _company of bachelors_.

  Badena, iii. 93, _delayed not_.

  Baile, i. 122, _bale_, _evil_, _mischief_, _misery_, _trouble_.

  Bairn, ii. 70;
    bairne, i. 59, _child_.

  Baith, i. 143, 321, _both_.

  Bale, i. 108, 280, ii. 8, 59, _evil_, _hurt_, _mischief_, _misery_;
    baleful, i. 136.

  Balow, ii. 211 (a nursery term), _hush_, _lullaby_.

  Balys bete, i. 35, _remedy our evils_.

  Ban, ii. 70, _curse_.

  Band, i. 70, 148, _bond_, _covenant_.

  Bandrolles, iii. 290, _streamers_, _little flags_.

  Bane, i. 29, _bone_.

  Banket, ii. 225, _banquet_.

  Banning, ii. 212, _cursing_.

  Barker, ii. 96, _dealer in bark_.

  Barne, i. 26, _child_, _man_, _person_.

  Barrow hogge, i. 214, _gelded hog_.

  Basnete, i. 29, basnite, i. 28, bassonett,  i. 48, _helmet_.

  Bason, _helmet_.

  Batchilere, i. 68, _knight_.

  Bathe, i. 30, _both_.

  Bats, ii. 21, _cudgels_.

  Bauld, i. 321, _bold_.

  Bauzen's skinne, i. 308, _Sheepskin gloves with the wool on the
    inside_.

  Bayard, ii. 22, _a noted horse in the  old romances_.

  Be, ii. 9, _by_.

  Beanes, ii. 203, _beams_.

  Bearing arowe, i. 176, _an arrow  that carries well_.

  Bed, ii. 13, _bade_.

  Bede, ii. 21, 23, _bid_, _offer_, _engage_.

  Bedeaft, iii. 272, _deafened_.

  Bedeene, ii. 57, iii. 11, _immediately_.

  Bedight, i. 132, _bedecked_.

  Bedone, iii. 6, 237, _wrought_, _made-up_, _ornamented_.

  Beere, i. 50, iii. 42, _bier_.

  Beforn, i. 321;
    beforne, i. 29, 65,  _before_.

  Begilde, ii. 76;
    begylde, ii. 44, _beguiled_, _deceived_.

  Beheard, i. 114, _heard_.

  Behove, i. 180, _behoof_.

  Beir, i. 84;
    beire, ii. 212, _bear_.

  Belive, i. 115;
    belyfe, i. 173, _immediately_, _presently_, _shortly_.

  Ben, ii. 15, 16, iii. 208, _been_, _be_, _are_.

  Ben, ii. 70, _within doors_, _the inner  room_.
    (The "but" is the outer room. "A but and a ben" is a house
      containing two rooms.)

  Bene, ii. 16, _bean, an expression of  contempt_.

  Benison, i. 322, _blessing_.

  Bent, bents, _long coarse grass_, i.  24, 25, 28;
    _also wild fields_, i. 41,  43, 65, 78.

  Beoth, ii. 11, _be_, _are_.

  Ber, ii. 13, _bare_.

  Ber the prys, ii. 11, _bare the prize_.

  Berne, i. 41, _man_.

  Bernes, iii. 208, _barns_.

  Berys, ii. 21, _beareth_.

  Beseeme, _become_.

  Besene, ii. 25, _dressed_.

  Beshradde, iii. 317, _cut into shreds_.

  Besmirche, _to soil_, _discolour_.

  Bespake, iii. 158, _spoke_.

  Besprent, ii. 52, _besprinkled_.

  Beste, _beest_, _art_.

  Beste, i. 189, _beast_.

  Bested, _abode_.

  Bestis, i. 122, _beasts_.

  Bestrawghted, i. 189, _distracted_.

  Besy, i. 129, _busy_.

  Bet, _better_.

  Beth, i. 284, _be_, _is_, _are_.

  Bett, ii. 63, _lighted_. A.S. bétan fyr, _to make or light a fire_.

  Bette, iii. 356, _did beat_.

  Beuche, ii. 391, _bough_.

  Bewray, ii. 179, _discover_.

  Bi mi leautè, ii. 7, _by my loyalty_, _honesty_.

  Bickarte, i. 24, _skirmished_;
    also _swiftly_ coursed.

  Mr. Lambe also interprets "Bickering," by rattling, _e.g._,

    And on that slee Ulysses head
    Sad curses down does BICKER.

                                                  Translat. of Ovid. P.

  Bide at hame, iii. 97, _remain at home_.

  Biilt, ii. 63, _built_.

  Bil, i. 168, _pike or halbert_.

  Bille, i. 282, 289, ii. 143, _writing_.

  Biqueth, ii. 12, _bequeath_.

  Bird, iii. 94, _child_, _term of affection usually applied to a woman_.

  Birk, ii. 363, iii. 238, _birch-tree_.

  Blak, ii. 21;
    blake, ii. 21, _black_.

  Blan, i. 269;
    blane, i. 30;
    blanne, i. 68, 91, 275, ii. 144, _lingered_, _stopped_.

  Blaw, i. 145, iii. 147, _blow_;
    blawing, iii. 147, _blowing_.

  Blaze, ii. 260, _emblazon_, _display_.

  Blee, i. 72, ii. 56, _colour_, _complexion_.

  Bleid, iii. 94, _bleed_;
    bleids, ii. 116, _bleeds_.

  Blend, iii. 55;
    blent, iii. 51, _blended_.

  Blent, _ceased_.

  Blink, ii. 120, _a glimpse of light_.

  Blinkan, iii. 123, _twinkling_.

  Blinks, iii. 74, _twinkles_, _sparkles_.

  Blinne, iii. 46, _cease_, _give over_.

  Blissing, iii. 208, _blessing_.

  Blist, i. 310, _blessed_.

  Blude, i. 34, _blood_;
    blude reid, i. 100, _blood red_.

  Bluid, i. 59, 83 _blood_;
    bluidy, i. 144, _bloody_;
    reid bluid, _red blood_, i. 146.

  Blyth, ii. 68, _joyous_, _sprightly_.

  Blyth, iii. 74, _joy_, _sprightliness_.

  Blyve, i. 175, _instantly_.

  Bode, i. 120, _abode_, _stayed_.

  Boist, boisteris, _boast_, _boasters_.

  Boke, ii. 16, _book_.

  Bollys, ii. 21, _bowls_.

  Boltes, _shafts_, _arrows_.

  Bomen, i. 24, _bowmen_.

  Bonny, iii. 147, _handsome_, _comely_.

  Bonys, ii. 22, _bones_.
    Roundebonys, ii. 22.

  Bookes-man, iii. 52, _clerk_, _secretary_.

  Boot, ii. 97;
    boote, i. 109, 115, 136, ii. 59;
    boots, iii. 154, _gain_, _advantage_, _help_, _assistance_.

  Bore, iii. 112, _boar_.

  Bore, iii. 40, _born_.

  Borowe, i. 162, _to redeem_.

  Borrow, i. 275, borrowe, i. 269, _pledge_, _surety_.

  Bost, ii. 24, boste, i. 122, _pride_;
    _boast_, ii. 8.

  Bot, ii. 60, _but_.

  Bot, ii. 109, _without_;
    bot and, i. 144, _and also_;
    bot dreid, _without dread, or certainly_;
    bot gif, ii. 83, _unless_.

  Bots, iii. 186, _a worm troublesome to horses_.

  Bougill, i. 147, _bugle-horn_, _hunting-horn_.

  Boun, i. 146, _ready_.

  Bowen, ii. 44, _ready_.

  Bower, iii. 125, 126, 131, _parlour_, _chamber_.

  Bower-window, iii. 125, _chamber window_.

  Bowne, i. 63, 77, ii. 94, _ready_;
    bowned, _prepared_;
    bowne ye, i. 107, _prepare ye_, _get ready_;
    bowne to dine, _going to dine_.
    Bowne _is a common word in the North for "going,"_ e.g. Where are
      you bowne to? _Where are you going to?_ P.

  Bow're-woman, iii. 96, _chambermaid_.

  Bowyn, i. 41, _ready_.

  Bowynd, i. 40, _prepared_.

  Bowys, i. 28, _bows_.

  Brade, ii. 107, 112, _broad_.

  Brae, iii. 147, _the brow or side of a hill_, _a declivity_.
    Braes of Yarrow, ii. 363, _hilly banks of the river Yarrow_.

  Braid, _broad_.

  Braid, i. 100, _open_.

  Brand, i. 83, 96;
    brande, i. 25, 30, 40, 48, 67, _sword_.

  Brast, i. 66, 168, ii. 56, 98, iii. 61, _burst_.

  Braw, ii. 227, _brave_.

  Braw, ii. 69, _bravely_, _handsomely_.

  Brayd attowre the bent, ii. 84, _hastened over the field_.

  Brayn-pannes, ii. 25, _skulls_.

  Bread, ii. 192, _breadth_.

  Bred, i. 43, _broad_.

  Breeden, i. 108, _breed_.

  Breere, i. 111, _briar_.

  Bren, i. 80, 145;
    brenn, ii. 57, _burn_.

  Brenand drake, ii. 23, _fiery dragon_.

  Brenn, i. 144;
    brenne, i. 73, 159, _burn_;
    brent, i. 160, ii. 55, iii. 87, _burnt_;
    brenning, ii. 142, _burning_.

  Brest, i. 29, _breast_.

  Brest, ii. 21, _burst_.

  Brether, i. 87, _brethren_.

  Bridal (bride-ale), _nuptial feast_.

  Brigue, iii. 95;
    briggs, iii. 92, _bridge_.

  Brimme, ii. 257, _public_, _universally known_;
    A.-S. bryme.

  Britled, iii. 12, _carved_.

  Broche, ii. 22, _any ornamental trinket_. _Stone buckles of silver
    or gold with which gentlemen and ladies clasp their shirt-bosoms,
    and handkerchiefs, are called in the North_ broches, _from the_ Fr.
    broche, _a spit_. P.

  Brocht, ii. 85, _brought_.

  Broder, ii. 360, _brother_.

  Broding, i. 64, 78, _pricking_.

  Broht, ii. 13;
    brohte, ii. 8, _brought_.

  Bronde, i. 49, _sword_.

  Brooche, brouche, _a spit_, _a bodkin_.

  Brooke, _enjoy_;
    and I brook, i. 34, _if I enjoy_.

  Brouke hur wyth wynne, ii. 20, _enjoy her with pleasure_.

  Browd, i. 24, _broad_.

  Broyt, ii. 21, _brought_.

  Bryttlynge, i. 25, _cutting up_, _quartering_, _carving_.

  Buen, ii. 12;
    bueth, ii. 13, _been_, _be_, _are_.

  Buff, i. 150, _arm_, _dress_.

  Bugle, i. 65, 78, _bugle horn_, _hunting horn_ (_being the horn of
    a bugle or wild bull_).

  Buik, _book_.

  Buit, ii. 81, _help_.

  Burgens, ii. 383, _buds_, _young shoots_.

  Burn, iii. 147, bourne, _brook_.

  Bushment, i. 122, _ambush_, _snare_.

  Busk, i. 146, _dress_, _deck_;
    busk ye, i. 107, ii. 363, _dress ye_;
    busk and boun, i. 146, _make yourselves ready to go_;
    buske them blyve, i. 175, _get them ready instantly_;
    buskit, i. 143, _dressed_;
    buskt them, i. 122, _prepared themselves_, _made themselves ready_.

  But, _without_;
   but let, _without hindrance_.

  But, i. 75, ii. 144, _unless_;
    but an, i. 144, _unless_;
    but yf, ii. 23, _unless_.

  Bute, ii. 83, _boot_, _good_, _advantage_.

  Butt, ii. 70, _the outer room_.
    See Ben.

  By three, _of three_.

  Byde, ii. 83, _stay_.

  Bydys, i. 28, _bides_, _abides_.

  Bye, _buy_, _pay for_.

  Byears, i. 33, beeres, _biers_.

  Byhynde, ii. 19, _behind_.

  Byre, iii. 236, _cow-house_.

  Byste, i. 41, _beest_, _art_.


  Ca', iii. 93, _call_.

  Caddis, i. 376, _worsted ribbon_.

  Cadgily, ii. 68, _merrily_, _cheerfully_.

  Caitif, iii. 228;
    caitive, ii. 135, _wretch_.

  Cales, ii. 243, _Cadiz_.

  Calliver, _a large pistol or blunderbuss_.

  Camscho, iii. 385. (Glossary--_Eldridge_) _grim_.

  Can, i. 44, 77, ii. 24, 70;
    cane, i. 47, _gan_, _began_.

  Can, ii. 37, _know_.

  Canna, iii. 123;
    cannæ, i. 59, 146, _cannot_.

  Cannes, _wooden cups_, _bowls_.

  Cantabanqui, i. 374, _ballad-singers_, _singers on benches_.

  Cantells, ii. 23, _pieces_, _corners_.

  Canty, ii. 69, _cheerful_, _chatty_.

  Capul, ii. 24, _a poor horse_;
    capulys, ii. 24, _horses_.

  Capull hyde, i. 107, 114, _horse hide_.

  Carle, ii. 68, iii. 123, _clown_, _a strong, hale old man_.

  Carlish, i. 133, iii. 14, _churlish_, _discourteous_.

  Carlist, iii. 329, _churlish_?

  Carp, ii. 136;
    carpe, ii. 19, _to speak_, _recite_, also _to censure_, i. 33,
      _complain_.

  Carpyng, ii. 20, _tumult_.

  Cast, i. 26, _mean_, _intend_.

  Caste, ii. 128, _stratagem_.

  Catives, ii. 302, _wretches_.

  Cau, ii. 71, _call_.

  Cauld, i. 143, ii. 68, _cold_.

  Causey, ii. 139, _causeway_.

  Cawte and kene, i. 44, _cautious and active_.

  Cent, i. 130, _scent_.

  Cetywall, i. 307, _setiwall_, _the herb valerian_, _or mountain
    spikenard_.

  Cham, ii. 288, _I am, in Somersetshire dialect_.

  Chanteclere, i. 307, _the cock_.

  Chap, iii. 93, 95, _knock_.

  Charke-bord, ii. 203? same as archeborde, _side of the ship_.
    See Hach-borde.

  Chayme, ii. 74, _Cain_, or _Ham_.

  Chays, i. 26, _chase_.

  Che, ii. 286, _I. in Somersetshire dialect_.

  Cheare, ii. 216, _chair_.

  Checke, i. 301, _to stop_, _to chide_.

  Cheefe, _the upper part of the  scutcheon in heraldry_.

  Cheffe, i. 28, _chief_;
    cheffest, iii.  44, _chiefest_.

  Cheften, i. 28, _chieftain_.

  Cheis, _choose_.

  Chevaliers, _knights_.

  Cheveron, ii. 25, _upper part of the scutcheon in heraldry_.

  Chevy Chase, i. 19, _Cheviot chase or hunt_.
    See same contraction in Tividale.

  Chield, _fellow_.

  Child, iii. 58, _knight_.

  Children, i. 66, 77, _knights_.

  Chill, ii. 286, _I will, in Somersetshire dialect_.

  Cholde, y-cholde, ii. 12, _I would_.

  Choul'd, ii. 287, _I would, in Som. dialect_.

  Christentie, christentye, i. 92, ii. 61;
    christianté, i. 31,
    _Christendom_.

  Church-ale, iii. 198, _a wake or feast in commemoration of the
    dedication of a church_.

  Chyf, chyfe, _chief_.

  Chylded, ii. 382, _brought forth_, _was delivered_.

  Chylder, ii. 25, _children's_.

  Chyviat chays, i. 26. (See Chevy Chase.)

  Claiths, ii. 69, _clothes_.

  Clattered, _beat so as to rattle_.

  Clawde, _clawed_, _tore_, _scratched_;
    figuratively, _beat_.

  Clead, ii. 69, _clad_, _clothe_;
    cleading, iii. 237, _clothing_.

  Cleaped, i. 306, _called_, _named_.

  Cled, iii. 147, _clad_, _clothed_.

  Clepe, ii. 13, _call_;
    cleped, ii. 14, _called_.

  Cliding, iii. 97, _clothing_.

  Clim, i. 155, _contraction of Clement_.

  Clough, i. 155, _a broken cliff_.

  Clout, i. 197, _a cloth to strain milk through_;
    _rag_, ii. 71.

  Clout, ii. 100, _mend_.

  Clowch, _clutch_, _grasp_.

  Clymme, ii. 74, _climb_.

  Coate, i. 309, _cot_, _cottage_.

  Cockers, i. 308, _a sort of buskins or short boots fastened with
      laces or buttons, worn by farmers or shepherds_.
    Cokers, _fishermen's boots_ (Littleton's Dict.)

  Cog, iii. 203, _to lie_, _cheat_.

  Cohorted, ii. 382, _incited_, _exhorted_.

  Cokenay, ii. 28, explained by Percy to be a diminutive of cook,
    from the Latin coquinator, or coquinarius;
    it really means _a lean chicken_.

  Cold, ii. 232;
    colde, ii. 55, _could_.

  Cold, iii. 6, _knew_,
    where I cold be;
    i. 286, _where I was_.

  Cold rost, _nothing to the purpose_.

  Cole, iii. 108, _coal_.

  Coleyne, iii. 33, _Cologne steel_.

  Collayne, i. 48, _Cologne steel_.

  Com, ii. 12;
    come, ii. 21, _came_;
    comen, i. 89;
    commen, i. 33, _come_.

  Con, ii. 27, _can_.

  Con fare, _went_, _passed_.

  Con springe, ii. 11, _spread abroad_.

  Con twenty thanks, iii. 210, _give twenty thanks_.

  Confeterd, i. 120, _confederated_.

  Confound, i. 218, _destroy_.

  Contray, ii. 19, _country_.

  Cop, ii. 9, _head_, _the top of anything_.

  Coppell, ii. 21, _name of a hen_.

  Cordiwin, i. 318, _originally Spanish or Cordovan leather,
    afterwards commoner leather_.

  Cors, ii. 21, _body_.

  Cors, i. 26, _curse_.

  Corsiare, i. 30, _courser_, _steed_.

  Coste, ii. 30, _coast_, _side_, _region_.

  Cote, i. 303;
    cott, iii. 183, _cottage_.

  Cote, iii. 53, _coat_.

  Cotydyallye, ii. 381, _daily_, _every day_.

  Could bear, ii. 137, did _bare_.

  Could be, _was_.

  Could dye, _died_.

  Could his good, _knew what was good for him_.

  Could weip, _wept_.

  Coulde, _cold_.

  Counsayl, _secret_.

  Countie, i. 303, _count_, _earl_.

  Coupe, i. 300, _coop, or a pen for poultry_.

  Courtas, ii. 82, _courteous_.

  Courteys, ii. 46, _courteous_.

  Courtnalls, iii. 182, _courtiers_.

  Couth, i. 306, _could_.

  Couthen, ii. 13, _knew_.

  Cowde, i. 44, _could_.

  Coyntrie, i. 308, _Coventry_.

  Cramasie, iii. 75, 147, _crimson_.

  Crancke, i. 307, _exultingly_.

  Cranion, iii. 198, _skull_.

  Crech, ii. 27. This word is incorrectly explained in the text as
    _crutch_. It is really a form of the French _crèche_, a crib or
    manger. It occurs as _cracche_ in the "Promptorium Parv." (1440).

  Crepyls, ii. 24, _cripples_.

  Cricke, i. 196, _properly an ant, but used for any small insect_.

  Crinkle, iii. 10, _run in and out_, _run into flexures_, _wrinkle_.

  Cristes cors, _Christ's corse_.

  Croche, ii. 312, _crouch_.

  Croft, ii. 22, _inclosure near a house_.

  Crois, ii. 13;
    croiz, ii. 12, _cross_.

  Crook, ii. 70, _twist_, _wrinkle_, _distort_;
    crook my knee, ii. 71, _make lame my knee_.
    They say in the North "the horse is crookit," _i.e._ lame;
      the "horse crooks," _i.e._ goes lame. P.

  Crouneth, ii. 12, _crown ye_.

  Crowch, i. 180, _crutch_.

  Crown, i. 26, _head_.

  Crowt, iii. 10, _to pucker up_, _draw close together_. (Another
    form of crowd.)

  Crumpling, ii. 257, _crooked_, _horned_.

  Cryance, i. 65, 66, 78, _fear_.

  Cule, ii. 229, _cool_.

  Cum, i. 28, 59, 101, 143;
    ii. 132, _come_, _came_.

  Cummer, ii. 133, _gossip_, _friend_;
    Fr. commère, compère.

  Cure, ii. 76, _care_, _heed_, _regard_.


  Dale, _deal_;
    bot gif I dale, ii. 83, _unless I share_.

  Dampned, i. 161, _damned_, _condemned_.

  Dan, _an ancient title of respect_, from Lat. Dominus.

  Danske, ii. 254, _Denmark_.

  Dare, ii. 360, _their_;
    ii. 361, _there_.

  Darh, ii. 14, _need_.

  Darr'd, ii. 118, _hit_.

  Dart the tree, ii. 115, _hit the tree_.

  Dat, ii. 360, _that_.

  Daunger halt, ii. 16, _fear holdeth_.

  Dawes, iii. 368, _days_.

  Dawkin, ii. 19, diminutive of David.

  De, ii. 360, _the_.

  De, i. 26, 30, _die_.

  Dealan, iii. 134, _dealing_.

  Deare, ii. 308, _hurt_.

  Deare, iii. 82, _dearly_.

  Deas, iii. _the high table in a hall_. F. dais, a canopy.

  Ded, ii. 26;
    dede, i. 30, _dead_.

  Dede is do, ii. 36, _deed is done_.

  Dee, iii. 99, _die_.

  Deemed, iii. 52;
    deemedst, ii. 217, _doomed_, _judged_;
    _thus in the Isle of Man judges are called Deemsters_. P.

  Deere, ii. 304, _hurt_, _mischief_.

  Deerely, ii. 194, iii. 27;
    _preciously_, _richly_.

  Default, i. 303, _neglect_.

  Deid, ii. 83, _dead_;
    deid bell, iii. 134, _passing bell_.

  Deid, i. 101, 147, _deed_.

  Deip, i. 60;
    _deep_.

  Deir, i. 83, 101;
    _dear_.

  Deir, iii. 96, _dearly_.

  Deir, ii. 82, _hurt_, _trouble_.

  Deie, ii. 35, _deal_, _bit_.

  Dele, ii. 45, _to deal_.

  Dell, _deal, part_;
    every dell, _every part_.

  Delt, iii. 119, _dealt_.

  Dem, ii. 361, _them_.

  Demaines, iii. 209, _demesnes_, _estates_.

  Deme, ii. 265, _judged_, _doomed_.

  Denay, i. 217, _deny_, _refuse_.

  Dent, ii. 21, _a dint_, _blow_.

  Deol, ii. 13, _dole_, _grief_.

  Depart, ii. 37, _separate_;
    departing, ii. 84, _dividing_.

  Depured, i. 129, _purified_, _run clear_.

  Deray, ii. 28, _confusion_.

  Dere, ii. 20, _dear_, also _hurt_.

  Dere, ii. 19, _dire or sad_.
    A.-S. derian, to hurt. "My dearest foe"--_Hamlet_.

  Dere, iii. 357, _wild animals_.

  Derked, ii. 37, _darkened_.

  Dern, ii. 82, _secret_;
    I'dern, ii. 83, _in secret_.

  Descreeve, i. 63, _describe_;
    descrying, iii. 168, _describing_.

  Devys, ii. 12, _devise_, _the act of bequeathal by will_.

  Dey, ii. 361, _they_.

  Dey, i. 33;
    deye, ii. 12, _die_.

  Did off, i. 114, _took off_;
    did on, iii. 65, _put on_.

  Dight, i. 63, 74;
    dighte, ii. 162, _decked_, _dressed_, _prepared_, _wrought_,
      _fitted out_, _done_.

  Diht, ii. 11, _wrought_;
    ii. 12, _sent_.

  Dill, ii. 82, _share_.

  Dill, _still_, _calm_, _mitigate_.

  Dill, i. 63, 77, 78, _dole_, _grief_, _pain_, _sorrow_;
    dill I drye, i. 64, _pain I suffer_;
    dill was dight, _grief was upon him_.

  Dinge, iii. 51, _knock_, _beat_.

  Dis, _this_.

  Discreeve, i. 77, _describe_, or _discover_.

  Disna, iii. 123, _does not_.

  Disteynyd, i. 124, _stained_.

  Distrere, iii. 108, _the horse ridden by a knight in the tournament_.

  Do, ii. 36, _done_.

  Dochter, i. 59, 145, ii. 68, _daughter_.

  Dois, i. 59, 83, _does_.

  Dois, _days_.

  Dol, ii. 13;
    dole, i. 63, 137, 292, _dole_, _grief_, _sorrow_.

  Doleful dumps, i. 188, 261, _sorrowful gloom or heaviness of heart_.

  Dolours, _dolorous_, _mournful_.

  Don, iii. 208, _do_.

  Don, ii. 23, _be made_.

  Done roun, ii. 80, _run down_.

  Dosend, iii. 123, _dosing_, _drowsy_, _torpid_, _benumbed_.

  Doth, dothe, doeth, _do_.

  Doubt, iii. 327, _fear_.

  Doubteous, _doubtful_.

  Dough, ii. 360, _though_.

  Doughty, iii. 26;
    doughtye, i. 305;
    dowghtye, i. 40;
    _formidable_.

  Doughete, i. 28,_ a doughty man_.

  Dounae, i. 60, _cannot_.

  Dout, ii. 23, _fear_.

  Doute, i. 167, _doubt_.

  Doutted, i. 123, _redoubted_, _feared_.

  Douyty, _doughty_.

  Doy-trogh, ii. 24, _dough trough_, _a kneading trough_.

  Doys, i. 34, _does_.

  Doyter, ii. 20, _daughter_.

  Drake;
    brenand drake, ii. 23, _burning, fire-breathing dragon_.

  Drap, _drop_;
    draping, ii. 114, drapping, iii. 97, _dropping_.

  Dre, i. 31, 83, _suffer_.

  Dreid, ii. 82, _dread_.

  Dreips, i. 146, _drips_, _drops_.

  Dreiry, iii. 100, _dreary_.

  Drieps, iii. 146, _drips_, _drops_.

  Drie, i. 144, _suffer_;
    _ill_, i. 284;
    _undergo_, i. 83.

  Drighnes, i. 119, _dryness_.

  Drogh, ii. 26, _drew_.

  Drovyers, i. 254, _drovers_, _cattle-drivers_.

  Drye, i. 49, 64, 78, _suffer_, _endure_.

  Dryng, ii. 8, _drink_.

  Duble dyse, _double or false dice_.

  Dude, ii. 7, _did_;
    dudest, ii. 9, _didst_.

  Duel, ii. 11, _grief_.

  Dughty, ii. 19, 26, _doughty_;
    dughtynesse of dent, ii. 21, _sturdiness of blows_.

  Dule, i. 83, 145, _dole_, _grief_, _sorrow_;
    dulefu', ii. 69, _doleful_.

  Dumps, i. 188, 261, ii. 69, _heaviness of heart_.

  Dwellan, iii. 134, _dwelling_.

  Dy, _die_;
    dyan, iii. 134, _dying_.

  Dyd on, i. 159, _put on_;
    dyd off, i. 164, _doffed_, _put off_.

  Dyght, i. 30, _dressed_, _put on_.

  Dyht, ii. 14, _to dispose_, _order_.

  Dynt, i. 30, dynte, i. 31, dyntes, i. 32, _dint_, _blow_, _stroke_.

  Dystrayne, ii. 37, _afflict_.

  Dyyt, ii. 24, _dight_, _dressed_.

  Eame, _uncle_.

  Eard, _earth_.

  Earn, ii. 70, _to curdle_, _make cheese_.

  Eathe, i. 273, _easy_.

  Eather, iii. 100, _either_.

  Eche, ii. 246, _each_.

  Ee, i. 101, 178, ii. 60;
    een, i. 320, _eye_, _eyes_.

  Eene, iii. 75, _even_.

  Effund, iii. 301, _pour forth_.

  Eftsoon, iii. 304, _in a short time_.

  Egge, ii. 259, _to urge on_.

  Eik, ii. 83, _also_.

  Eiked, ii. 85, _added_, _enlarged_.

  Ein, i. 145, _even_.

  Eir, i. 101, 146, 320, _ever_.

  Eise, ii. 212, _ease_.

  Eke, ii. 13, _also_.

  Eldridge, i. 64, 78, _wild_, _hideous_, _ghostly_, _lonesome_,
    _uninhabited_.

  "In the ballad of _Sir Cauline_ we have 'Eldridge Hills,' p. 65,
  'Eldridge Knight,' p. 65, 'Eldridge Sword,' p. 67. So Gawin Douglas
  calls the Cyclops the 'Elriche Brethir,' _i.e._ brethren (b. ii. p.
  91, l. 16), and in his Prologue to b. vii. (p. 202, l. 3) he thus
  describes the Night-Owl:--

    "'Laithely of forme, with crukit camscho beik,
    'Ugsome to here was his wyld  _elrische_ skreik.'

  "In Bannatyne's MS. Poems (fol. 135, in the Advocate's Library
  at Edinburgh) is a whimsical rhapsody of a deceased old woman
  travelling in the other world; in which

    "'Scho wanderit, and yeid by, to an _Elrich_ well.'

  "In the Glossary to G. Douglas, Elriche, &c. is explained by 'Wild,
  hideous: Lat. _Trux_, _immanis_;' but it seems to imply somewhat
  more, as in Allan Ramsay's Glossaries." P.

  Elke, _each_.

  Elles, ii. 20, _else_.

  Ellumynynge, i. 123, _embellishing_.

  Elyconys, i. 119, _Helicon's_.

  Elvish, _peevish_, _fantastical_.

  Eme, i. 44, ii. 9, _uncle_, _kinsman_.

  Endyed, i. 123, _dyed_.

  Ene, eyn, _eyes_.

  Ene, _even_.

  Enharpid, i. 123, _hooked or edged_.

  Enkankered, _cankered_.

  Enouch, iii. 100, _enough_.

  Enowe, i. 275, _enough_.

  Ensue, ii. 43, _follow_.

  Entendement, ii. 382, _understanding_.

  Entent, ii. 49, _intent_.

  Ententifly, ii, 382, _to the intent_, _purposely_.

  Envie;
    envye, i. 42, _malice_, _ill-will_, _injury_.

  Er, ii. 20, 26, _are_.

  Ere, ii. 36, 42, _ear_.

  Erlys, ii. 47;
    erlés, iii. 94, _earls_.

  Erst, i. 83, _heretofore_.

  Etermynable, i. 126, _interminable_, _unlimited_.

  Ettled, ii. 116, _aimed_.

  Evanished, iii. 133, _vanished_.
  Everych, ii. 27, _every_;
    everychone, i. 156;
    iii. 108, _every one_.

  Ew-bughts, iii. 74, _pens for milch-ewes_.

  Eyen, i. 72;
    eyn, ii. 15;
    eyne, i. 132, _eyes_.

  Ezar, iii. 97, _maple_.


  Fa', i. 84, 146, _fall_;
    fa's, iii. 123, _falls_.

  Fach, i. 33, feche, _fetch_.

  Fader, iii. 365;
    fadir, i. 83;
    fatheris, _father_, _father's_.

  Fadge, iii. 236, _a bundle of sticks_, _a thick loaf of bread_,
    _coarse heap of stuff_.

  Fadom, i. 102, _fathom_.

  Fae, ii. 109, _foe_.

  Fain, ii. 69;
    faine, i. 164, 287;
    fayne, i. 157, _glad_, _fond_, _well pleased_;
    faine of fighte, i. 92, _fond of fighting_.

  Fair of feir, _of a fair and healthful look_;
    perhaps, far off (free from) fear. P.

  Falds, iii. 123, _thou foldest_.

  Fallan, iii. 133, _falling_.

  Fals, ii. 212, _false_.

  Falser, iii. 161, _a deceiver_, _hypocrite_.

  Falsing, ii. 61, _dealing in falsehood_.

  Fand, iii. 324, _found_.

  Fang, ii. 26, _make off_.

  Fann'd, ii. 246, _found_.

  Fannes, _instruments for winnowing corn_.

  Fantacy, ii. 136;
    fantasye, ii. 160, _fancy_.

  Farden, i. 72, _flashed_.

  Fare, i. 84, ii. 21, _go forth_, _pass_, _travel_.

  Fare, _the price of a passage_, _shot_, _reckoning_.

  Farley, i. 107, _strange_.

  Fauht, i. 122, _fought_.

  Fauld, ii. 85, _field_.

  Fauyt, ii. 30, _fought_.

  Fawkon, i. 42, _falcon_.

  Fawn, iii. 122, _fallen_.

  Fawte, i. 122, _fought_.

  Fay, i. 178;
    faye, i. 106, _faith_.

  Fayrere, ii. 45, _fairer_.

  Faytors, i. 215, _deceivers_, _dissemblers_, _cheats_.

  Fe, i. 178, _fee_, _reward_, also _bribe_.
      Applied to lands and tenements which are held by perpetual right,
        and by acknowledgment of superiority to a higher lord.

  Feare. In feare, ii. 149, _company_.

  Feat, i. 300, _nice_, _neat_.

  Featously, i. 306, _neatly_, _dexterously_.

  Fedyrs, ii. 22, _feathers_.

  Fee, ii. 140, _property_.

  Feere, i. 63, 76, _mate_, _companion_.

  Feill, ii. 86, _fail_(?).

  Feil, fele, _many_.

  Feirs, ii. 114, _companions_.

  Feir, i. 101, ii. 82;
    feire, ii. 212, _fear_.

  Feit, i. 84, 102, _feet_.

  Felawe, ii. 44, _fellow_.

  Feld, ii. 25, _field_.

  Fell, i. 65, 78;
    ii. 19, _furious_, _fierce_, _keen_, i. 306.

  Fell, ii. 25, _hide_.

  Feloy, ii. 25, _fellow_.

  Fend, ii. 21;
    fende, ii. 59, _defend_.

  Fendys pray, i. 125, _the prey of the fiends_.

  Fere, ii. 36, _fear_.

  Fere, i. 64, 68, 73, 156, ii. 20, _mate_, play-feres, i. 59,
    _play-fellows_.

  Ferly, ii. 19, _wonder_;
    also _wonderfully_, ii, 25.

  Ferlyng, ii. 8, _furlong_.

  Ferr, i. 62, _far_.

  Fersly, i. 160, _fiercely_.

  Fesaunt, i. 42, _pheasant_.

  Fest, ii. 27, _feast_.

  Fet, ii. 128, iii. 193;
    fett, i. 286;
    fette, i. 50, 68, _fetched_;
    deepe-fette, i. 76, _deep-drawn_.

  Fethe, i. 29, _faith_.

  Fettle, i. 116;
    fetteled, i. 108;
    fettled, i. 113, 116, _prepared_, _addressed_, _made ready_.

  Fey, ii. 118, _predestinated to some misfortune_.

  Feyytyng, ii. 19, _fighting_.

  Fie, ii. 82, _sheep or cattle_.

  Fier, i. 149, _fire_.

  Filde, _field_.

  Filinge, iii. 63, _defiling_.

  Fillan, iii. 134, _filling_.

  Finaunce, i. 125, _fine_, _forfeiture_.

  Find frost, _find mischance or disaster_.

  Firth, ii. 85, _copse_, _wood_.

  Fit, i. 27;
    fitt, ii. 177;
    fytte, i. 44, _part or division of a song_.

  Fitts, _i.e._ divisions or parts in music, are alluded to in
      "Troilus and Cressida," act. iii. sc. 1.
    (See Steevens's note.) P.

  Fit, _foot, feet_;
    a fit, ii. 70, _on foot_.

  Flatred, ii. 25, _slit_.

  Flayne, iii. 25, _flayed_.

  Flearing, i. 215, _sneering_.

  Flee, iii. 97, _fly_.

  Fles, ii. 24, _fleece_.

  Fleyke, ii. 134, _a large kind of hurdle_;
    cows are frequently milked in hovels made of fleyks.

  Flindars, iii. 97, _pieces_, _splinters_.

  Flix, iii. _flux_.

  Flote, i. 201.
    To flote is to flete or fleet, to flit, to change position easily,
      to move away quickly; as fleeting moments, flitting birds

    Flote and flete are two forms of the same word; and flutter bears
      the same relation to flote that flitter does to flete.
    In the Roxburghe copy of the ballad of _Willow, Willow_ this word
      is printed as "fleet." (Roxb. Ballads, ed. Chappell, part i. p.
      172.)

  Flout, ii. 179;
    floute, i. 197, _to sneer_;
    fflouting, i. 289.

  Flowan, ii. 364, _flowing_.

  Flude, ii. 364, _flood_.

  Flyte, i. 196, 281, 288, _to contend with words_, _scold_.

  Fole, iii. 108, _foal_.

  Fonde, ii. 12, _contrive_, _endeavour_, _try_.

  Foo, i. 50, _foe_.

  Fooder, ii. 66, _wine tun_;
    Germ. _fuder_.

  For, _on account of_.

  For but, ii. 146, _unless_.

  Forbode, _commandment_.

  Force, no force, _no matter_.

  Forced, ii. 76, _regarded_, _heeded_.

  Forefend, i. 268;
    forfend, ii. 97, _prevent_, _defend_, _avert_, _hinder_.

  Forewearied, _over-wearied_.

  Forfeebled, ii. 107, _enfeebled_.

  For-fought, ii. 25, _over-fought_.

  Fors, ii. 21, _strength_.

  Fors. I do no fors, ii. 16, _I don't care_.

  Forsede, i. 122, _heeded_, _regarded_.

  Forst, ii. 76, _regarded_.

  Forthynketh, i. 174, _repenteth_, _vexeth_, _troubleth_.

  Forthy, _therefore_.

  Forwarde, i. 44, _van_.

  Forewatcht, ii. 77, _over-wakeful_, _kept awake_.

  Fosters of the fe, i. 175, _foresters of the king's demesnes_.

  Fot pot, ii. 9, _with his foot push on_.

  Fote, i. 49, _foot_.

  Fou, i. 147, iii. 75;
    fow, iii. 99, _full_, also _fuddled_.

  Fowkin, ii. 22, _crepitus ventris_.

  Fox't, _drunk_.

  Frae, i. 144, _from_.

  Fraemang, ii. 107, _from among_.

  Fraid i. 323, _afraid_.

  Freake, i. 31, _man_, _person_, _human creature_.

  Freake, _a whim or maggot_.

  Freckys, i. 29, _men_.

  Freers, ii. 128;
    fryars, _friars_.

  Freits, i. 146, _ill omens_, _ill-luck_.

  Freke, i. 49, ii. 25, _man_;
    frekys, ii. 25, _men_.

  Freyke, ii. 135, _humour_, _freak_.

  Freyke, i. 29, _strong man_.

  Freyned, ii. 134, _asked_;
    freyned that freake, ii. 134, _asked that man_.

  Frie, ii. 82;
    _free_.

  Fro, i. 159;
    froe, i. 106, 139, _from_.

  Fruward, _forward_.

  Furth, ii. 21, _forth_.

  Fuyson, i. 123;
    foyson, _plenty_, also _substance_.

  Fyer, ii. 55, 105, _fire_;
    fyerye, iii. 118, _fiery_.

  Fyers, _fierce_.

  Fyhte, ii. 12, _fight_.

  Fykkill, i. 123, _fickle_.

  Fyl'd, iii. 147, _defiled_.

  Fyll, i. 121, _fell_.


  Ga, ii. 24;
    _go_;
    gais, ii. 83, _goes_.

  Ga, ii. 113, _gave_.

  Gaberlunyie, ii. 71, _a wallet_;
    gaberlunyie man, ii. 67, _a tinker_, _beggar_, _one who carried a
      wallet_.

  Gade, iii. 122, _went_.

  Gadelyngys, ii. 20, _gadders_, _idle fellows_.

  Gaderyd, ii. 27, _gathered_.

  Gadryng, ii. 22, _gathering_.

  Gae, ii. 70, _gave_.

  Gae, i. 143;
    gaes, ii. 69, _go_, _goes_.

  Gaed, ii. 69, _went_.

  Gair, ii. 86, _strip of land_.

  Gair, i. 59, _geer_, _dress_.

  Gait, iii. 95, _gate_.

  Galliard, ii. 162, _a sprightly kind of dance_.

  Gamon, i. 67, _to make game_, _to sport_.
    A.-S. gamenian _jocari_.

  Gan, i. 63, 129, 309, ii. 68, _began_.

  Gan, i. 30;
    gane, i. 30, ii. 69, _gone_.

  Gang, i. 83, ii. 69, _go_.

  Ganyde, i. 28, _gained_.

  Gar, ii. 70;
    iii. 94, gare, garre, i. 44, _make_, _cause_, _force_, &c.;
    gars, i. 321, _makes_.

  Gard, iii. 97;
    garde, i. 28;
    garred,  garr'd, ii. 117;
    gart, iii. 97, _made_.

  Gargeyld, i. 128, from _gargouille_, _the spout of a gutter_. The
    tower was adorned with spouts cut in the figures of greyhounds,
    lions, &c.

  Garland, i. 111, _the ring within which the prick or mark was set
    to be shot at_.

  Garth, ii. 391 _garden_, _yard_.

  Gat, i. 146, _got_.

  Gate, i. 108, _way_.

  Gaup, ii. 139, _gapes_, _waits_.

  Gear, i. 322, iii. 122, _goods_, _effects_, _stuff_.

  Gederede ys host, ii. 8, _gathered his host_.

  Geere, i. 274, 288, _property_.

  Gef, ii. 31, _give_.

  Geid, _gave_.

  Geir, ii. 69, _gear_, _property_.

  Gerte, iii. 357, _pierced_.

  Gesse, ii. 49, _guess_.

  Gest, ii. 85, _act_, _feat_, _story_, _history_.

  Gettyng, i. 43, _booty_.

  Geud, i. 103, _good_.

  Geve, ii. 53, _give_.

  Gibed, _jeered_.

  Gi', i. 145;
    gie, i. 145, _give_;
    gied, i. 321, _gave_.

  Giff, i. 322;
    giffe, ii. 57, _if_.

  Gilderoy, i. 320, _red boy_ (or gillie);
    Gaelic, _Gille ruadh_ (pronounced _roy_).

  Gillore, ii. 361, _plenty_.

  Gimp, ii. 110, _neat_, _slender_.

  Gin, i. 60, iii. 74, _if_.

  Gin, iii. 203;
    Ginn, iii. 53;
    _engine_, _contrivance_.

  Gins, ii. 53, _begins_.

  Give, ii. 237;
    _if_.

  Glave, ii. 115, _sword_.

  Glede, i. 26, _a red-hot coal_.

  Glent, i. 24, _glanced_.

  Glente, iii. 356, _slipped aside_.

  Gleyinge, i. 408, _minstrelsy_.

  Glist, ii. 110, _glistered_.

  Glose, i. 120, _gloss over_.

  Glowr, iii. 75, _stare_ or _frown_.

  Gloze, iii. 203, _canting_, _dissimulation_, _fair outside_.

  God before, _God be thy guide_, a form of blessing.
    So in Shakespeare's "King  Hen. V." (A. iii. sc. 8) the King says:--
      "My army's but a weak and sickly guard;
       Yet, God before, tell him we will come on." P.

  Gode, ii. 21, _good_.

  Gods-pennie, ii. 140, _earnest money_.

  Gon, ii. 21, _began_.

  Gone, _go_.

  Good, _a good deal_.

  Good-e'ens, ii. 68, _good evenings_.

  Good-se peny, ii. 147, _earnest money_.

  Gorget, ii. 57, _the dress of the neck_.

  Gorrel-bellyed, ii. 346, _pot-bellied_.

  Gowan, ii. 364, _the common yellow crowfoot or gold cup_, _daisy_.

  Gowd, i. 145, iii. 75, _gold_;
    gowden glist, ii. 110, _shone like gold_;
    gowden graith'd, ii. 230, _caparisoned with golden accoutrements_.

  Graine, i. 158, i. 197, _scarlet_.

  Graith'd, ii. 230, _caparisoned_.

  Gramarye, i. 91;
    grammarye, i. 92, _grammar_, _abstruse learning_.

  Gramercy, i. 173;
    gramercye, ii. 95, _I thank you_.
    Fr. grand-mercie.

  Graunge;
    peakish graunge, i. 299, _a lone country house_.

  Graythed, ii. 21, _made ready_.

  Gre, ii. 21, _prize_.

  Grea-hondes, i. 24, _grey-hounds_.

  Grece, i. 129, _step_, _flight of steps_.

  Greece, _fat_;
    hart of greece, i. 170, _a fat hart_. Fr. graisse.

  Greet, iii. 100, _weep_.

  Grein, iii. 75, _green_.

  Gresse, i. 43, iii. 62, _grass_.

  Gret, ii. 12, _grieved_.

  Greves, i. 24, _groves_, _bushes_.

  Grippel, ii. 254, _griping_, _tenacious_, _miserly_.

  Grone, iii. _groan_.

  Ground-wa', i. 145, _groundwall_.

  Growynde, i. 48, 49, _ground_.

  Grownes, ii. 256, _grounds_.

  Growte, ii. 256. In Northamptonshire is a kind of small beer
    extracted from the malt after the strength has been drawn off. In
    Devon it is a kind of sweet ale medicated with eggs, said to be
    a Danish liquor. (Growte is a kind of fare much used by Danish
    sailors, being boiled groats, _i.e._ hulled oats, or else shelled
    barley, served up very thick, and butter added to it.--_Mr.
    Lambe._) P.

  Grype, ii. 57, _a griffin_.

  Grysely groned, i. 49, _dreadfully groaned_.

  Gude, ii. 70, 82, _good_.

  Guerdon, iii. 18, _reward_.

  Guid, i. 83, _good_.

  Gule, iii. 7, _red_.

  Gyb, ii. 22, _nickname of Gilbert_.

  Gybe, ii. 257, _jibe_, _jest_, _joke_;
    gybing, ii. 260.

  Gyle, gyles, _guile_, _guiles_.

  Gyn, ii. 9, _engine_, _contrivance_.

  Gyrd, ii. 22, _girded_, _lashed_.

  Gyrdyl, ii. 22, _girdle_.

  Gyse, _guise_, _form_, _fashion_.


  Ha, i. 196, _has_;
    hae, ii. 71, _have_;
    haes, iii. 235, _has_.

  Ha', i. 84, iii. 94, _hall_;
    ha's, ii. 109, _halls_.

  Habbe ase he brew, ii. 8, _have as he brews_.

  Habergeon, _a lesser coat of mail_.

  Hable, i. 121, _able_.

  Hach-borde, ii. 193, _probably that part of the bulwark of
    the ship which is removed to form the gangway or entrance on
    board,--in fact, the "hatch"--(or half-door) "board."_

  Haif, ii. 82, _have_.

  Haggis, ii. 132, _a sheep's stomach stuffed with a pudding made
    of mince-meat, &c_.

  Hail, ii. 83, _healthful_.

  Hair, ii. 81, 86, _hoar or grey_.

  Halch, iii. 325, _salute_.

  Halched, i. 280, _saluted_, _embraced_, _fell on his neck_.

  Halesome, ii. 142, _wholesome healthy_.

  Halse, iii. 75, _the neck_, _throat_.

  Halt, ii. 16, _holdeth_.

  Ham, ii. 21, _them_.

  Hame, i. 143, _home_;
    hameward, ii. 84, _homeward_.

  Han, ii. 13, _have_.

  Handbow, _the long-bow or common bow, as distinguished from the
    cross-bow_.

  Hap, i. 255;
    happ, iii. 138;
    happe, i. 283, _fortune_;
    hap, i. 287, _chance_, _happen_, i. 303.

  Hard, ii. 312, _heard_.

  Hare ... swerdes, ii. 8, _their ... swords_.

  Harflue, ii. 30, _Harfleur_.

  Harlocke, i. 307, _perhaps charlock, or wild rape, which bears a
    yellow flower, and grows among corn, &c_.

  Harneis, i. 273, _armour_.

  Harnisine, ii. 112, _harness_, _armour_.

  Harrowe, i. 280, _harass_.

  Harowed, i. 164, _harassed_, _disturbed_.

  Hart, iii. 128, _heart_;
    hartes, i. 50;
    harts, i. 138;
    hartis, i. 147.

  Hartely, ii. 38, _earnestly_.

  Hartly lust, i. 124, _hearty desire_.

  Harwos, ii. 27, _harrows_.

  Haryed, i. 41, 22, _pillaged_.

  Hastarddis, i. 120, _perhaps hasty, rash fellows, or upstarts_.

  Hatcht, ii. 77, _seized_.

  Hauld, i. 143, _hold_.

  Hauss bone, iii. 75, _the neck bone (halse bone), a phrase for the neck_.

  Have owre, i. 102, _half over_.

  Haves, ii. 20, _effects_, _substance_, _riches_.

  Haveth, ii. 8, _has_.

  Haviour, i. 304, _behaviour_.

  Hawberke, i. 66, _a coat of mail, consisting of iron rings, &c._

  Hawkin, ii. 19, _diminutive of Harry, from Halkin_.

  Haylle, i. 43, _hale_, _strong_.

  He, i. 171, _hie_, _hasten_.

  He, i. 24, _high_.

  Heal, i. 29, _hail_.

  Hear, i. 103, _here_.

  Heare, ii. 77;
    heares, _hair_, _hairs_.

  Heathynesse, iii. 40, _heathendom._

  Heawying, i. 31, _hewing_, _hacking._

  Hech, ii. 27, _hatch_, _half door of a cottage_ (sometimes spelt heck).

    "Dogs leap the hatch," _King Lear_, act. iii. sc. 6.

    "'He'll have to ride the _hatch_' is a familiar phrase about
      Looe, and signifies 'He'll be brought to trial.' It is
      generally used jocosely in the case of any loud professor of
      religion who has been 'overtaken in a fault;' and the idea is
      that his trial will be the ordeal of attempting to ride or sit
      on the top or narrow edge of a hatch or half-door, when if he
      maintain his seat he will be pronounced innocent, if he fall
      he is guilty. If he fall inwards (_i.e._ within the room or
      building), he will be pardoned, but if he fall outwards, he
      will be excommunicated." W. Pengelly (_Devonshire Association
      Report_, vol. vii. p. 488).

  Hecht to lay thee law, _promised (engaged) to lay the law_.

  Hed, hede, _head_;
    hedys, ii. 25, _heads_.

  Hede, ii. 12, _had_.

  Hede, _hied_.

  Hee, i. 42, _high_.

  Heele, i. 291, _he will_.

  Hees, ii. 70, _he is_.

  Heght, ii. 117, _promised_.

  Heiding hill, ii. 231, the _heading (or beheading) hill_. The
    place of execution was anciently an artificial hillock.

  Heigh, iii. 94, _high_.

  Heil, ii. 81, _health_.

  Heir, ii. 83, _here_;
    also _hear_;
    herid, iii. 96, _heard_.

  Hele, ii. 42, _health_.

  Helen, ii. 15, _heal_.

  Helpeth, ii. 12, _help ye_.

  Hem, ii. 13, _them_.

  Hend, i. 72, i. 74, 80, _kind_, _gentle_, _courteous_.

  Henne, ii. 8, _hence_.

  Hent, ii. 26, _laid hold of_.

  Hepps and hawes, ii. 284, _hips and haws_.

  Herault, ii. 59, _herald_.

  Her, ii. 393, _hear_.

  Her, ii. 35, _their_.

  Here, ii. 42, _hair_.

  Herkneth, ii. 7, _hearken ye_.

  Herry, ii. 19, _Harry_.

  Hert, i. 59, _heart_.

  Hes, ii. 80, _has_.

  Hest, _hast_.

  Hest, i. 67, _command_, _injunction_.

  Het, ii. 346, _heated_.

  Hete, ii. 41, _heat_.

  Hether, _hither_.

  Hether, _heather_, _heath_.

  Hett, iii. 6, _bid_, _call_, _command_.

  Heuch, ii. 86, _rock or steep hill_.

  Hevede, ii. 9, _had_, _hadst_;
    hevedest, ii. 12.

  Hevenriche, ii. 12, _heavenly_.

  Hewberke, i. 72, _coat of mail_.

  Hewkes, iii. 26, _party-coloured coats of the heralds_.

  Hewyns in to, _hewn in two_.

  Hey-day guise, iii. 204, _rustic dances_, _a corruption of "heydegies."_

  Heynd, ii. 82, _gentle_, _obliging_.

  Heyye, ii. 13, _high_.

  Hi, hie, _he_.

  Hicht, a-hicht, _on height_.

  Hie, i. 32, _high_;
    hier, ii. 169, _higher_;
    _hire_, iii. 324.

  Hight, i. 29, 270, 286, _promise_, _promised_, _engaged_, also
    _named_, _called_.

  Hilt, ii. 98, _taken off_, _flayed_.

  Hinch boys, _pages of honour_.

  Hind, ii. 70, _behind_.

  Hinde, i. 32, _gentle_.

  Hings, iii. 97, _hangs_.

  Hinnible, iii. 304, _horse_, or _pony_.

  Hinny, ii. 84, _honey_.

  Hip, iii. 99, _the berry which contains the stones or seeds of
    the dog-rose_.

  Hir, i. 143;
    hire, iii. 207, _her_;
    hir lain, iii. 95, _herself alone_.

  Hird, ii. 81, _herd_.

  Hirsel, i. 143, _herself_.

  Hit, ii. 13, _it_;
   hit be write, ii. 12, _it be written_.

  Hode, i. 164, _hood_, _cap_.

  Holden, ii. 14, _hold_.

  Hole, i. 124, 126, iii. 280, _whole_.

  Hollen, iii. 325, _holly_.

  Holp, i. 120, _help_;
    holpe, iii. 32, _helped_.

  Holt, ii. 140, _wood_.

  Holtes, i. 42, _woods_, _groves_.
    In Norfolk a plantation of cherry-trees is called a "cherry holt." P.

  Holtis hair, ii. 81, 86, _hoary or grey woods or heaths_.
    "Holtes seems evidently to signify hills in the following passage
      from Turberville's "Songs and Sonnets," 12mo. 1567, fol. 56:--

    "Yee that frequent the hilles,
      And highest Holtes of all;
    Assist me with your skilfull quilles,
      And listen when I call."

    "As also in this other verse of an ancient poet:--

    "Underneath the Holtes so hoar." P.

  Holy, _wholly_.

  Holy-rode, ii. 22, _holy cross_;
    holye rood, ii. 56.

  Honde, _hand_;
    honden wrynge, ii. 11, _hands wring_.

  Hondert, i. 50, _hundred_.

  Hondrith, i. 24, 25, 30, 32, 34, _hundred_.

  Hong, ii. 77;
    honge, i. 161, _hang_;
    _hung_, i. 308.

  Hooly, iii. 134, _slowly_, _gently_.

  Hophalt, _limping, hopping, and halting_.

  Hore, iii. 327, _whore_.

  Hount, i. 26, _hunt_.

  Houzle, ii. 60, _give the sacrament_.

  Hoved, i. 129, _heaved_;
    _hovered_, i. 43.

  Howers, ii. 234, _hours_.

  Huche, ii. 81, _wood, or a shed_.

  Hud, ii. 23, _proper name_.

  Hue, ii. 12, _she_.
    A.-S. heo; refers to huerte, which is feminine. It is an
      interesting example of the continuance of a grammatical gender
      in English.

  Huerte trewe, ii. 11, _true heart_.

  Huggle, iii. 72, _hug_, _clasp_.

  Hull, i. 307, _hill_.

  Hur, ii. 20;
    hurr, ii. 24, _her_.

  Hye, i. 136, _high_, _highest_;
    hyest, ii. 59;
    hyer, iii. 63, _hire_.

  Hyght, i. 44, _promised or engaged_.

  Hyght, _high_;
    on hyght, i. 41, 47, _aloud_.

  Hyllys, i. 32, _hills_.

  Hynd out o'er, ii. 115, _over the country_.

  Hyp-halte, ii. 27, _lame in the hip_.

  Hyrdyllys, ii. 27, _hurdles_.

  Hys, ii. 20, _his_.

  Hyssylton, ii. 19, _Islington_.

  Hyt, hytt, ii. 49, _it_.

  Hyyt, ii. 20, _promised_.


  I-clipped, i. 129, _called_.

  I-feth, i. 29, _in faith_.

  I-lore, ii. 13, _lost_.

  I-strike, ii. 16, _stricken_, _struck_.

  I-trowe, _verily_.

  I-tuned, _tuned_.

  I-ween, _verily_.

  I-wis, i. 276, _verily_;
    I-wys, i. 68, 70.

  I-wot, _verily_.

  Ich, ii. 286, _I_;
    ich biqueth, ii. 12, _I bequeath_.

  Ich, ii. 22;
    icha, ii. 25, _each_.

  Ide, iii. 72, _I would_.

  Ild, ii. 69, _I'd_, _I would_.

  Ile, i. 196, _I'll_, _I will_.

  Illfardly, ii. 70, _ill-favouredly_, _uglily_.

  Ilk, _same_;
    this ilk, _this same_.

  Ilk on, ii. 21, _each one_;
    ilka, ilke, _every_;
    ilka ane, iii. 122, _every one_.

  Im, i. 103, _him_.

  Ime, i. 198, ii. 57, _I am_.

  Incontinent, iii. 187, _forthwith_.

  In fere, ii. 36, _together_, _in company_.

  Ingle, ii. 68, _fire_.

  Inogh, ii. 26, _enough_;
    inoughe, ii. 147, _enough_.

  Into, iii. 238, _in_.

  Intres, i. 129, _entrance_, _admittance_.

  Irke, ii. 148, _angry_.

  Is, i. 149, ii. 8, _his_.

  Ise, ii. 211, iii. 236, _I shall_.

  I'st, i. 289, 292, _I'll_.

  It's neir, _it shall never_.

  Iye, i. 432, _eye_.


  Janglers, ii. 85, _talkative persons_, _wranglers_, _tell-tales_.

  Jear, ii. 118, _derision_.

  Jetted, iii. 186, _strutted, or went proudly_.

  Jille, iii. 77, _used here as a man's name_.

  Jimp, i. 145, _slender_.

  Jo, i. 320, ii. 132, _sweetheart_, _friend_, contraction of _joy_.

  Jogelers, i. 441, _jugglers_.

  Jow, iii. 134, _single stroke in tolling_.

  Juncates, iii. 202, _junket_, _curds and clouted cream_.

  Jupe, ii. 116, _an upper garment_.


  Kall, i. 125, _call_.

  Kame, iii. 147, _comb_;
    kameing, iii. 97, _combing_.

  Kan, i. 123, 430, _can_.

  Kantle, iii. 26, _piece_, _corner_.

  Karlis of kynde, i. 120, _churls by nature_.

  Kauk, ii. 71, _chalk_.

  Kauld, i. 103, _called_.

  Keel, ii. 71, _ruddle_.

  Keepe, i. 309, ii. 256, _care_, _heed_.
    So in the old play of "Hick Scorner," "I keepe not to clymbe so
      hye;" _i.e._ I study not, care not, &c.

  Keip, ii. 82, _keep_;
    ii. 84, _watch_.

  Keipand, ii. 82, _keeping_.

  Kell, iii. 101, _net for a woman's hair_.

  Kembe, iii. 100, 186, _to comb_;
    kembing, iii. 102, _combing_;
    kemb'd, iii. 302, _combed_.

  Kempe, i. 90, 94, ii. 183, _soldier_, _warrior_.

  Kemperye man, i. 94, _soldier_, _fighting man_.

  "_Germanis_ Camp, _Exercitum, aut Locum ubi Exercitus_
  _castrametatur, significat: inde ipsis Vir Castrensis et
  Militaris_ kemffer, _et_ kempher, _et_ kemper, _et_ kimber, _et_
  kamper, _pro varietate dialectorum, vocatur: Vocabulum hoc
  nostro sermone nondum penitus exolevit; Nor folcienses enim
  plebeio et proletario sermone dicunt_. 'He is a kemper old man,
  _i.e. Senex Vegetus est:' Hinc_ Cimbris _suum nomen_: 'kimber
  _enim Homo bellicosus, pugil, robustus miles, &c. significat_.'
  Sheringham de Anglor. gentis. orig. pag. 57. _Rectius autem
  Lazius_ [apud eundem, p. 49]. 'Cimbros _a bello quod_ kamff, _et
  Saxonice_ kamp _nuncupatos crediderim: unde bellatores viri_
  Die Kempffer, Die Kemper.'" P.

  Kems, i. 102, _combs_.

  Ken, ii. 69, _know_;
    kens, iii. 122, _knows_;
    kenst, i. 196, _knowest_.

  Kend, ii. 70, _knew_;
    _known_, iii. 99;
    kenn'd, ii. 365.

  Kene, ii. 15, _keen_.

  Kepand, ii. 81, _keeping_.

  Kepers, i. 181. "Those that watch by the corpse shall tye up my
    winding-sheet." P.

  Kester, i. 276, _nickname for Christopher_.

  Kever chefes, _kerchiefs_ or _head covers_.
    (See vol. 3, p. 356.)

  Kexis, ii. 27, _elder sticks used for candles_.

  Kilted, iii. 132, _tucked up_.

  Kind, _nature_. To carp is our kind, _it is natural for us to talk of_;
    of hir kind, ii. 154, _of her family_.

  Kirk, iii. 75;
    kirke, i. 137, _church_;
    kirk wa', iii. 238, _church wall, or churchyard wall_;
    kirkyard, i. 243, iii. 132, _churchyard_.

  Kirns to kirn, ii. 70, _churns to churn_.

  Kirtle, i. 222, _a petticoat_, _a woman's gown_.

  Kist, ii. 69, _chest_.

  Kit, i. 123, _cut_.

  Knave, _servant_.

  Knaw, ii. 82, _know_.

  Knellan, iii. 134, _knelling_, _ringing the knell_.

  Knicht, iii. 237, _knight_.

  Knight's fe, _such a portion of land as required the possessor to
    serve with man and horse_.

  Knowles, _knolls_, _little hills_.

  Knyled, i. 32, _knelt_.

  Kowarde, i. 46, _coward_.

  Kowe, ii. 21, _cow_.

  Kuntrey, i. 124, _country_.

  Kurteis, i. 125, _courteous_.

  Kyd, ii. 21, _shown_.

  Kye, ii. 134, _kine_, _cows_.

  Kyrtel, ii. 42;
    kyrtell, i. 65, _petticoat_, _gown_, _a man's under garment_.

  "Bale, in his 'Actes of Eng. Votaries' (part ii. fol. 53), uses
  the word Kyrtle to signify a monk's frock. He says, Roger, Earl of
  Shrewsbury, when he was dying, sent 'to Clunyake, in France, for
  the kyrtle of holy Hugh the abbot there,' &c." P.

  Kythe, i. 427, _make appear_, _show_, _declare_.

  Kythed, _appeared_.


  Laigh, ii. 117, _low_.

  Laith, i. 101, ii. 70, _loth_.

  Laithly, _loathsome_, _hideous_.

  Laitl, i. 103, _little_.

  Lamb's wool, iii. 183, _a liquor composed of ale and roasted apples_.

  Lane, lain, _lone_;
    her lane, ii. 69;
    hir lain, iii. 95, _alone by herself_.

  Lang, i. 101, ii. 20, _long_.

  Lang'd, ii. 107, _longed_.

  Langsome, i. 321, _long_, _tedious_.

  Lap, iii. 93, 95, _leaped_.

  Largesse, iii. 26, _gift_, _liberality_.

  Lasse, ii. 13, _less_.

  Late, ii. 47, _let_.

  Latte, ii. 12, _hinder_.

  Lauch, i. 101, _laugh_;
    lauched, i. 101, _laughed_.

  Launde, i. 170, _clear space in a forest_.

  Lawlands, ii. 227, _lowlands_.

  Lay, i. 79, _law_.

  Layde, i. 291, _lady_.

  Layden, i. 66, _laid_.

  Layland, i. 66, 67, 79, _green sward_.

  Laylands, i. 73, _lands in general_.

  Layne, lain, _laid_.

  Layne, i. 45, 46, _deceive_, _break one's word_.

  Lazar, ii. 55, _leper_.

  Leal, ii. 69, _loyal_, _honest_, _true_.

  Leane, _conceal_, _hide_.

  Lear'd, i. 307, _pastured_.

  Lease, _lying_, _falsehood_;
    withouten lease, i. 170, _verily_, _without lying_.

  Lease, iii. 102, _leash_, _thong_, _cord_.

  Leasynge, _lying_, _falsehood_.

  Leaute, ii. 7, _loyalty_.

  Lee, ii. 68, _lea_, _field_, _pasture_.

  Lee, iii. 96, _lie_.

  Leeche, i. 63, 75, 77, _physician_.

  Leechinge, i. 63;
    leedginge, i. 77, _doctoring_, _medicinal care_.

  Leek, _phrase of contempt_.

  Leel, ii. 112, _true_.

  Leer, _look_.

  Leeve London, i. 273, iii. 101, _dear London_.

  Leever, i. 160, _sooner_.

  Leeveth, i. 88, _believeth_.

  Lefe, i. 173, _dear_.

  Lefe, _leave_;
    leves, _leaves_.

  Leffe, leefe, _dear_.

  Leid, iii. 96, _lyed_.

  Leil, ii. 85, _loyal_, _true_.

  Leir, ii. 82, _learn_;
    lere, i. 306, _learning_.

  Leive, i. 84, iii. 236, _leave_.

  Leman, i. 186, 327;
    leiman, i. 301;
    lemman, iii. 97, _lover_, _mistress_.

  Lemster wooll, i. 307, _Leominster wool_.

  Lene, ii. 13, _give_.

  Lenger, i. 64, ii. 20, _longer_.

  Lengeth in, _resideth in_.

  Lere, i. 72, _face_, _countenance_, _complexion_.

  Lese, ii. 26, _lose_.

  Lesynge, i. 174;
    leasing, _lying_, _falsehood_.

  Let, i. 24, _hinder_;
    lett, ii. 85, _hindrance_.

  Lett, i. 93, _left or let be opened_.

  Lettest, i. 74, _hinderest_, _detainest_.

  Letteth, i. 168, _hindereth_.

  Lettyng, i. 172, _hindrance_, _without delay_.

  Leugh, ii. 118;
    leuche, ii. 81, _laughed_.

  Leve, ii. 38, _remain_.

  Lever, i. 46, 71, 75, 173, _rather_;
    lever than, ii. 39, _rather then_.

  Leves and bowes, ii. 42, _leaves and boughs_.

  Lewd, i. 308;
    leud, ii. 134, _ignorant_, _scandalous_.

  Ley, iii. 123, _lay_.

  Leyke, ii. 135, _play_.

  Leyre, lere, _learning_, _lore_.

  Libbard, _leopard_;
    libbard's bane, iii. 198, _the herb wolfbane_.

  Lichtly, iii. 147, _lightly_, _easily_.

  Lig, i. 144, iii. 70, _lie_;
    ligge, ii. 11;
    liggd, ii. 83, _lay_.

  Lightfoote, iii. 182, _venison_.

  Lightile, i. 161, _quickly_.

  Lightsome, i. 65, _cheerful_, _sprightly_.

  Limber, ii. 260, _supple_, _flexible_.

  Limitoures, iii. 208, _friars licensed to beg within certain limits_.

  Limitatioun, iii. 208, _a certain precinct allowed to a limitour_.

  Lingell, i. 308, _a thread of hemp rubbed with resin, &c., used
    by rustics for mending their shoes_.

  Lire, _flesh_, _complexion_.

  List, i. 256;
    lith, ii. 11, _lieth_.

  Lith, i. 156;
    lithe, i. 268;
    lythe, _attend_, _hearken_, _listen_.

  Lither, i. 94, iii. 47, _idle_, _lazy_, _naughty_, _worthless_, _wicked_.

  Live-lang, iii. 132, _live-long_.

  Liver, i. 282, _deliver_.

  Liverance, i. 282, 289, _deliverance_ (_money or a pledge for
    delivering you up_).

  Livor, i. 289, _deliver_.

  Load;
    lay on load, i. 74, _give blows_.

  Lodly, ii. 63;
    lodlye, ii. 56, _loathsome_.

  Loe, ii. 70, iii. 99, _love_;
    lo'ed, iii. 98, _loved_.

  Logeyng, i. 43, _lodging_.

  Loht, ii. 9;
    be the luef, be the loht, _whether you like it or loathe it_.

  Loke, i. 308, _lock of wool_.

  Lokyd, ii. 73;
    lokyde, i. 25, _looked_.

  Lome, ii. 63, _man_, _object_.

  Lond, iii. 207, _land_.

  Longes, i. 218, _belongs_;
    longeth, ii. 43, _belongeth_.

  Longs, i. 30, _lungs_.

  Looket, i. 149, _looked_.

  Loone, ii. 145, _idle fellow_.

  Looset, i. 115, _loosed_.

  Lope, i. 65, 80, ii. 217, _leapt_.

  Lore, ii. 9, 13, _teaching_, _lesson_, _doctrine_, _learning_.

  Lore, _lost_.

  Lorrel, i. 441, _a sorry, worthless person_.

  Losel, ii. 134, 145, _the same as Lorrel_.

  Lothly, ii. 142, _loathsome_.

  "The adverbial terminations _-some_ and _-ly_ were applied
  indifferently by our old writers: thus, as we have _lothly_ for
  _loathsome_ above, so we have _ugsome_ in a sense not very remote
  from _ugly_ in Lord Surrey's version of Æn. 2nd, viz.--

  "'In every place the ugsome sightes I saw' (p. 29)." P.

  Loud and still, ii. 82, _openly and secretly_.

  Lough, i. 95, _laugh_;
    lought, ii. 282, _laughed_.

  Loun, i. 322, _loon_, _rascal_.

  Lounge, iii. 357, _lung_.

  Lourd, iii. 100, _rather (?)_

  Lout, ii. 117;
    loute, ii. 26, _stoop_.

  Louted, i. 72;
    lowtede, _bowed_, _did obeisance_.

  Lowe, i. 114, _a little hill_.

  Lowne, i. 198, _rascal_.

  Lowns, ii. 113, _blazes_.

  Lowttede, i. 120, _crouched_.

  Lude, ii. 82, _loved_.

  Lued, i. 323, _loved_.

  Luef, ii. 9, _love_.

  Lues, iii. 75, _loves_, _love_.

  Lugh, ii. 26, _laughed_.

  Luik, i. 146, _look_;
    luiks, i. 146, _looks_;
    luikt, ii. 229, _looked_.

  Luivt, ii. 82, _loved_.

  Lung, ii. 28, _long_.

  Lurden, i. 163;
    lurdeyne, _sluggard_, _drone_.

  Lust, ii. 42, _desire_.

  Luve, i. 320, _love_;
    luver, ii. 212, _lover_.

  Luvely, i. 143, _lovely_.

  Lyan, iii. 134, _lying_.

  Lyard, ii. 9, _grey;
    a name given to a horse from its grey colour, as Bayard from bay_.

  Lyff, ii. 49, _life_.

  Lyk, i. 28;
    lyke, ii. 38, _like_.

  Lynde, i. 168;
    lyne, i. 112, _the lime-tree_.

  Lys, ii. 12, _lies_.

  Lystenyth, iii. 371, _listen_.

  Lyth, i. 306, _easy_, _gentle_, _pliant_, _flexible_, _lithesome_.

  Lyvar, i. 30, _liver_

  Lyven na more, _live no more_, _no longer_.

  Lyyt, ii. 27, _light_;
    lyytly, ii. 26, _lightly_.


  Mad, ii. 24, _made_.

  Mahound, i. 88, _Mahomet_.

  Maining, ii. 211, _moaning_.

  Mair, ii. 84, _more_, _most_.

  Maist, i. 42, _mayest_.

  Mait, iii. 99, _might_, _may_.

  Majeste, maist, mayeste, _may'st_.

  Makes, i. 50, ii. 78, _mates_.

  Making, _versifying_.

  Makys, i. 33, _mates_.

  "As the words make and mate were, in some cases, used promiscuously
  by ancient writers, so the words cake and cate seem to have been
  applied with the same indifferency; this will illustrate that
  common English proverb, 'to turn cat (_i.e._ cate) in pan.' A
  pancake is in Northamptonshire still called a pancate." P.

  Male, i. 28, _coat of mail_;
    shirt of male, ii. 233.

  Manchet, iii. 206, _best kind of white bread_.

  Mane, i. 26, _man_.

  Mangonel, ii. 8, _a military engine used for discharging great
    stones, arrows, &c., before the invention of gunpowder_.

  March perti, i. 33;
    march partes, i. 34, _in the parts lying upon
    the marches_.

  March-pine, i. 306;
    marchpane, _a kind of biscuit_.

  Mare ii. 25, _more_.

  Margarite, ii. 328, _a pearl_.

  Mark, _a coin, in value 13s. 4d._

  Marke hym to the Trenité, _commit himself to God_.

  Marrow, ii. 109, 363, _match, or equal companion_.

  Mart, ii. 82, _marred_, _hurt_, _damaged_.

  Marvelit, iii. 238, _marvelled_.

  Mast, maste, _may'st_.

  Masterye, i. 110;
    maystery, i. 176, _a trial of skill_.

  Maugre, ii. 8;
    mauger, i. 23, _in spite of_.

  Maugre, ii. 83, _ill will_.

  Maun, i. 84, 143, 145, _must_.

  Mavis, iii. 97, _a thrush_.

  Mawt, iii. 123, _malt_.

  May, i. 63, 113;
    maye, i. 46, _maid_.

  Mayne, i. 122, _force_, _strength_.

  Mayne, _a horse's mane_.

  Mayny, i. 120, _a company_.

  Maze, _a labyrinth_, _anything entangled or intricate_.

  "On the top of Catherine-hill, Winchester (the usual play-place of
  the school), was a very perplexed and winding path, running in a
  very small space over a great deal of ground, called a Miz-Maze.
  The senior boys obliged the juniors to tread it, to prevent
  the figure from being lost, as I am informed by an ingenious
  correspondent." P.

  Mazer, in. 97, _drinking cup of maple_.

  Me, _men_;
    me con, ii. 13, _men began_.

  Me-thuncketh, ii. 11, _methinks_.

  Meane, ii. 259, _moderate_, _middle-sized_.

  Meany, i. 24, 25, _retinue_, _train_, _company_.

  Mease, ii. 119, _soften_, _mollify_.

  Meed, meede, i. 74, iii. 22, _reward_.

  Meet, in. 132, _even_.

  Meid, _mood_.

  Meikle, iii. 238, _much_.

  Meit, iii. 95, _meat_.

  Meit, ii. 83, 115, _meet_, _fit_, _proper_.

  Mekyl, ii. 21, _much_.

  Mell, ii. 260, _honey_.

  Mell, _meddle_, _mingle_.

  Meniveere, i. 308, _a species of fur_.

  Mense the faught, ii. 116, _to measure the battle_.

  "To give to the mense is to give above the measure. Twelve and one
  to the mense is common with children in their play." P.

  Menzie, ii. 133, _retinue_, _company_.

  Merch, ii. 115, _march_.

  Merchis, i. 34, _marches_.

  Merth, merthe, ii. 31, _mirth_.

  Messager, ii. 12, _messenger_.

  Mete, i. 180, _meet_, _fit_, _proper_.

  Mewe, ii. 254, _confinement_.

  Micht, ii. 230, _might_.

  Mickle, i. 65, 66, 72, 76, 137, 306, _much_, _great_.

  Midge, iii. 233, _a small insect_, _a kind of gnat_.

  Mids, ii. 77, _midst_.

  Minged, i. 66, 79, _mentioned_.

  Minny, ii. 69, _mother_.

  Mirk, ii. 120;
    mirkie, iii. 154, _dark_, _black_.

  Mirry, i. 101, 143, ii. 82, _merry_;
    mirriest, ii. 391, _merriest_.

  Mirry-land toune, i. 59.

  Misconster, ii. 349, _misconstrue_.

  Misdoubt, i. 302, _suspect_, _doubt_.

  Miskaryed, _miscarried_.

  Misken, i. 197, _mistake_.

  Mister, _to need_.

  Mith, iii. 45, _might_.

  Mither, i. 60, 83, 145, _mother_.

  Mo, i. 30, 161, ii. 16;
    moe, ii. 289, _more_.

  Moche, ii. 47, _much_.

  Mode, _mood_.

  Moder, i. 126, _mother_.

  Moiening, ii. 382, _by means of_.

  Mome, ii. 258, _blockhead_.

  Mon, ii. 11, _man_.

  Mone, ii. 37, _moon_.

  Mone lyyt, ii. 25, _moonlight_.

  Mone, ii. 35, iii. 127, _moan_.

  Monand, iii. 64, _moaning_, _bemoaning_.

  Monnynday, i. 24, 34, _Monday_.

  Mony, ii. 8, 13, 68, _many_.

  More, iii. 17,

  "originally and properly signified _a hil_l (from A.-S. mor,
  _mons_), but the hills of the north being generally full of bogs, a
  moor came to signify boggy, marshy, ground in general." P.

  Mores and the fenne, ii. 8, _hill and dale_;
    mores brodinge, i. 64, 78, _wide moors_.

  Morne, i. 101;
    to morn, ii. 20, 83, _on the morrow_, _in the morning_.

  Mornyng, ii. 49, _mourning_.

  Morwenynges, iii. 208, _mornings_.

  Mort, i. 25, _dead stag_.

  Most, _must_.

  Mot, i. 121, 126, _may_.

  Mote, i. 157, _might_;
    mote I thee, ii. 97, _may I thrive_.

  Mou, ii. 70, _mouth_.

  Mought, i. 68, 169, 308, _might_, _may it_, ii. 302.

  Mowe, ii. 13, 31, _may_.

  Muchele bost, ii. 8, _great boast_.

  Mude, ii. 82, _mood_.

  Muid, i. 147, _mood_.

  Mulne, ii. 8, _mill_.

  Mun, i. 63, 66, _must_.

  Mure, mures, _wild downs_, _heaths_, &c.

  Murn, ii. 85;
    murnd, ii. 86;
    murnit, ii. 81;
    murnt, ii. 84;
    murning, ii. 83, _mourn_, _mourned_, _mourning_.

  Muve, ii. 366, _move_;
    muvit, ii. 39, _moved_.

  Mykel, i. 46, _great_.

  Myllan, i. 29, _Milan steel_.

  Myn, ii. 12, _my_.

  Myne-ye-ple, i. 28, _probably a corruption of manople, a large gauntlet_.

  Myrry, _merry_.

  Mysuryd, i. 123, _misused_, _applied to a bad purpose_.

  Myyt, ii. 26, _might_;
    myyty, _mighty_.


  Na, ii. 12;
    nae, _no_, _not_, _none_.

  Naebody, ii. 139, _nobody_.

  Naithing, ii. 70, _nothing_.

  Nane, i. 320, ii. 70, iii. 75, _none_.

  Nappy, iii. 182, _strong, as ale_.

  Nar, i. 25, 27;
    nare, i. 30, _nor_.

  Nat, i. 143, ii. 35, _not_.

  Natheless, ii. 264, _nevertheless_

  N'availeth not, ii. 16, _availeth not_.

  Ne, ii. 12, _no_, _nor_, _not_.

  Near, ner, nere, _ne'er_, _never_.

  Neat, _oxen_, _cows_, _large cattle_;
    neates leather, ii. 100, _cowhide_.

  Neatherd, _a keeper of cattle_.

  Neatresse, ii. 259, _female keeper of cattle_.

  Nee, i. 71, 178, _nigh_.

  Neigh him neare, i. 94, _approach him near_.

  Neir, i. 146, _ne'er_, _never_.

  Neire, ii. 212;
    nere, _near_.

  Nemped, i. 409, _named_.

  Nere, ii. 135;
    ne were, _were it not for_.

  Nest, ii. 12, _next_, _nearest_.

  Nethar, _neither_.

  Neven, i. 396, _name_.

  New fangle, iii. 7, _new-fangled_, _fond of novelty_.

  Nicht, ii. 85, _night_.

  Nicked him of naye, i. 88, _nicked him with a refusal_.

  Nipt, _pinched_.

  No, _not_.

  Noble, _a gold coin in value twenty groats, or 6s. 8d._

  Nobles, i. 120, _nobleness_.

  Nocht, ii. 83, _not_.

  Nock, iii. 295, _the posteriors_.

  Nollys, ii. 21, _noddles_, _heads_.

  Nom, ii. 12, _took_.

  Nome, ii. 11, _name_.

  Non, ii. 16, _none_.

  None, i. 25, 31, ii. 37, _noon_.

  Nones, ii. 27, _nonce_.

  Nonys, ii. 22, _nonce or occasion_.

  Norland, iii. 237, _northern_.

  Norse, _Norway_.

  Norss menzie, ii. 114, _the Norse army_.

  North-gales, iii. 26, _North Wales_.

  Nou, ii. 9, _now_.

  Nourice, _nurse_.

  Nout, ii. 8, _nought_, also _not_, ii. 14.

  Nowght, _nought_.

  Nowls, _noddles_, _heads_.

  Noye, ii. 26, _hurt_.

  Noyt, ii. 24, _nought_, _not_.

  Ny, ii. 49;
    nye, i. 136, _nigh_;
    nyest, ii. 59, _nighest_.

  Nyyt, ii. 27, _night_.


  O, ii. 8, _one_;
    O', iii. 99, _of_;
    O, ii. 9, _on_.

  O wow, ii. 68, _an exclamation_.

  Obraid, iii. 99, _upbraid_.

  Occupied, i. 121, _used_.

  Ocht, _ought_.

  Off, ii. 177, _of_.

  Oloft, ii. 25, _on horseback_.

  On, ii. 49, _one_, _an_.

  On loft, ii. 22, _aloft_.

  Onfowghten, unfoughten, _unfought_.

  Ony, ii. 84, _any_.

  Onys, ii, 23, _once_.

  Opon, ii. 8, _upon_.

  Or, ii. 42, _before ever_.

  Ore, iii. 128, _over_.

  Orisons, _prayers_.

  Ost, i. 28, ii. 24, iii. 36;
    oste, i. 42, 43, 44;
    ooste, i. 272, _host_.

  Osterne, i. 291, _austere_.

  Oth, othe, iii. 49, _oath_.

  Ou, ii. 12, _you_.

  Ous, ii. 8, _us_.

  Out-owr, i. 147, _quite over_, _over_.

  Outbrayd, ii. 45, _drew out_, _unsheathed_.

  Outhorne, i. 167, _the summoning to arms by the sound of a horn_.

  Outrake, i. 285, 292, _an out ride or expedition_;
    _to raik is to go fast_.

  "Outrake is a common term among shepherds. When their sheep have a
  free passage from enclosed pastures into open and airy grounds they
  call it a good outrake." (Mr. Lambe.) P.

  Owar, i. 31, _hour_.

  Oware of none, i. 25, _hour of noon_.

  Owches, iii. 316, _bosses_.

  Owre, i. 144, ii. 70;
    _over_, _o'er_;
    _ere_, i. 101.

  Owreword, iii. 124, _the last word_, _burden of a song_.


  Pa, i. 59.

  Packing, i. 121, _dealing_.

  Pall, i, 89;
    palle, i. 71, _a cloak or robe of state_.

  Palmer, iii. 113, _a pilgrim who, having been in the Holy Land,
    carried a palm branch in his hand_.

  Paramour, i. 310, _gallant_, _lover_;
    _mistress_, ii. 45.

  Pardè, ii. 41;
    perdie, _verily_ (par Dieu).

  Paregall, i. 124, _equal_.

  Parle, iii. 36, _speak or parley_.

  Parti, party;
    a parti, i. 26, _apart or aside_.

  Partynere, ii. 41, _partner_.

  Pat, ii. 132, _pot_.

  Pattering, iii. 9,

  "_murmuring, mumbling, from the manner in which the Paternoster
  was anciently hurried over in a low inarticulate voice_." P.

  Pauky, ii. 68, _shrewd_, _cunning_, _sly_.

  Paves, i. 121, _a pavice, a large shield that covered the whole
    body_. Fr. pavois.

  Pavilliane, _pavilion_, _tent_.

  Pay, i. 173, _liking_, _satisfaction_.

  Paynim, i. 65, 88, iii. 41, _pagan_.

  Peakish, i. 299, _rude_, _simple_;
    peakish hull, i. 307, _perhaps the Derbyshire Peak_.

  Peare, i. 80, _peer_, _equal_.

  Pearlins, iii. 75, _coarse sort of bone-lace_.

  Pece, _piece of cannon_.

  Pee, i. 148, _piece_.

  Peere, i. 73, 77, _equal_.

  Pees, ii. 7, _peace_.

  Pele, ii. 24, _a baker's long-handled shovel_.

  Penon, _a banner or streamer borne at the top of a lance_.

  Pentarchye, ii. 345, _five heads_.

  Perchmine, _parchment_.

  Perde, i. 187, _verily_.

  Perelous, parlous, _perilous_, _dangerous_.

  Perfay, ii. 85, _verily_.

  Perfight, i. 123, _perfect_;
    perfightly, i. 124, _perfectly_.

  Perfytte, i. 272, _perfect_.

  Perkyn, ii. 20, _diminutive of Peter_.

  Perlese, i. 125, _peerless_.

  Perte, i. 50, _part_, _side_.

  Pertyd, i. 28, _parted_, _divided_.

  Pese, ii. 45, _peace_.

  Petye, i. 50, ii. 73, _pity_.

  Peyn, ii. 16, _pain_.

  Peyses, i. 48, _pieces_.

  Peysse, i. 44, _peace_.

  Peyters, ii. 13, _Peter's_.

  Philomele, iii. 81, _the nightingale_.

  Piece, _a little_.

  Pil'd, _peeled_, _bald_.

  Pine, i. 196, _famish_, _starve_.

  Pinner, ii. 337, _pinder, or impounder of cattle._

  Pious chanson, i. 183, _a godly song or ballad_.

  "Mr. Rowe's Edition of Shakespeare has 'The first Row of the
  Rubrick;' which has been supposed by Dr. Warburton to refer to the
  red-lettered titles of old ballads. In the large collection made by
  Mr. Pepys, I do not remember to have seen one single ballad with
  its title printed in red letters." P.

  Pipl, i. 103, _people_.

  Playand, ii. 115, _playing_.

  Play-feres, i. 59, _play-fellows_.

  Playning, i. 243, _complaining_.

  Plein, iii. 123, _complain_.

  Pleis, ii. 82, _please_.

  Plett, ii. 112, _plaited_.

  Pley, i. 59, ii. 83, _play_.

  Pleyn, ii. 16, _complain_.

  Plyyt, ii. 27, _plight_.

  Plowmell, ii. 25, _a small wooden hammer occasionally fixed to
    the plough_.

  Poll-cat, _cant word for a prostitute_.

  Pollys, ii. 21, _polls_, _heads_.

  Pompal, i. 233, _proud_, _pompous_.

  Popingay, i. 308, _a parrot_.

  Porcupig, iii. 285, _porcupine_.

  Portingale, iii. 50, _Portugal_.

  Portingalls, ii. 198, _Portuguese_.

  Portres, _porteress_.

  Poterner, iii. 7, _probably a pouch or bag._

  Pottle, iii. 187, _a measure of two quarts_.

  Poudered, ii. 23, _a term in heraldry for sprinkled over_.

  Pow'd, i. 59, _pulled_.

  Powlls, _polls_, _heads_.

  Pownes, i. 300, _pounds_.

  Praat, ii. 360, _prate_.

  Pray, i. 125, _prey_.

  Prayse-folk, ii. 27, _singing men and women_.

  Preas, iii. 26, _press_.

  Prece, i. 160, _crowd_, _press_;
    preced, i. 167, 171, _pressed_.

  Prest, i. 205, ii. 21, _ready_;
    prestly, i. 171;
    prestlye, i. 72, _readily_, _quickly_.

  Prickes, i. 111, _mark in the centre of the target_.

  Pricke-wande, _pole set up for a mark_.

  Pricked, i. 68, _spurred on_, _hasted_.

  Priefe, ii. 96, _prove_.

  Priving, ii. 70, _proving_, _testing_.

  Prove, ii. 46, _proof_.

  Prude, ii. 8, _pride_.

  Prycke, i. 175, _the mark_, _commonly a hazel wand_.

  Prycked, i. 43, _spurred_.

  Pryme, i. 156, _daybreak, or six o'clock in the morning_.

  Prys, ii. 11, _prize_.

  Pu, i. 145, _pull_.

  Puing, ii. 363, _pulling_.

  Puissant, iii. 110, _strong_, _powerful_.

  Purfell, iii. 25, _ornament, or border of embroidery_.

  Purfelled, iii. 25, _embroidered_.

  Purvayed, ii. 45, _provided_.

  Putry, iii. 6, _whoredom_.

  Pyght, i. 43, _pitched_.


  Quadrant, _four-square_.

  Quaint, ii. 257, _nice_, _fantastical_.

  Quarry, i. 255, _the slaughtered game in hunting or hawking_.

  Quat, ii. 116, _quitted_.

  Quay, iii. 75, _a young heifer, called a whie in Yorkshire_.

  Quean, iii. 21, 203, 252, _a sorry, base woman_, _a slut_.

  Quel, ii. 135, _cruel_, _murderous_.

  Quelch, _a blow or bang_.

  Quere, i. 124, _quire_, _choir_.

  Quest, i. 165, _inquest_.

  Quha, i. 101, _who_.

  Quhair, ii. 82, _where_.

  Quhair-eir, ii. 84, _wherever_.

  Quhan, i. 144, iii. 75, _when_.

  Quhaneir, iii. 75, _whenever_.

  Quhar, i. 100, _where_.

  Quhat, i. 143, _what_.

  Quhatten, i. 83, _what_.

  Quhen, i. 143, ii. 82, _when_.

  Quhilk, ii. 116, _which_.

  Quhy, i. 145, _why_.

  Quhyle, ii. 83, _while_.

  Quick, iii. 53, _alive_, _living_.

  Quiere, ii. 288, _choir_.

  Quillets, ii. 283, _quibbles_.

  Quiristers, ii. 166, _choristers_.

  Quitt, ii. 311, _requite_.

  Quo, ii. 69, _quoth_.

  Quyle, ii. 84, _while_.

  Quyrry, i. 25, _quarry of slaughtered game_.

  Quyt, ii. 85, _quite_.

  Quyte, i. 34, _requited_.

  Qwyknit, ii. 131, _quickened_, _restored to life_.


  Rade, i. 147, _rode_.

  Rae, ii. 24, _roe_.

  Raigne, ii. 253, _reign_.

  Raik, _to go apace_;
    raik on raw, ii. 82, _extend in a row_.

  Raise, ii. 69, _rose_.

  Rampire, ii. 52, _rampart_.

  Ranted, ii. 68, _made merry_.

  Rashing, i. 208, _the old hunting term for the stroke made by a
    wild boar with his fangs_.

  Raught, _reached_, _gained_, _obtained_.

  Raw, ii. 82, _row_.

  Rawstye, i. 116, _damp_(?)

  Rayt, ii. 26, _raught or reached_.

  Reachles, i. 113, _careless_.

  Read, ii. 148;
    reade, ii. 144, _advice_;
    reade me, i. 87, _advise me_.

  Rea'me, ii. 287, _realm_.

  Reane, i. 34, _rain_.

  Rearing, i. 88, _leaning against_.

  Reas, i. 24, _raise_.

  Reave, i. 89, 322, _bereave_.

  Reckt, i. 143, _regarded_.

  Reckyn, ii. 20, _reckon_.

  Red, i. 101, _read_.

  Redd, i. 79, _advise_.

  Reddyl, ii. 23, _riddle or sieve_.

  Rede, iii. 208;
    redde, ii. 13, _read_.

  Rede, i. 41, 66, iii. 94, _advise_;
    rede I can, ii. 37, _advice I  know_.

  Rede, i. 48, _guessed_.

  Redouted, i. 120, _dreaded_.

  Redresse, ii. 78, _care_, _labour_.

  Redyn, ii. 23, _moved_.

  Reek, i. 145, _smoke_.

  Reev, ii. 17;
    reeve, iii. 179, _bailiff_.

  Refe, ii. 20, _bailiff_.

  Refe, _bereave_.

  Reft, ii. 26, _bereft_.

  Register, iii. 210, _the officer who keeps the public register_.

  Reid, ii. 83, _advise_.

  Reid, i. 59, 83, 146, _red_;
    reid roan, i. 83, _red roan_.

  Reivs, ii. 83, _bereavest_.

  Rekeles, i. 42, _regardless_, _rash_.

  Remeid, ii. 83, _remedy_.

  Renisht, i. 88, _harnessed_.

  Renn, i. 196;
    renne, i. 160, ii. 89, _run_.

  Renneth, iii. 108, _runneth_;
    renning, ii. 142, _running_.

  Renyed, i. 122, _refused_.

  Reporte, i. 124, _refer_.

  Rescous, ii. 40, _rescues_;
    rescew, ii. 175, _rescue_.

  Reve, ii. 23, _bereave_, _deprive_.

  Revers, ii. 114, _robbers_, _pirates_, _rovers_.

  Rew, ii. 82, _take pity_.

  Rew, iii. 98;
    rewe, i. 70, ii. 46, _regret_;
    reweth, ii. 9, _regrets_;
    rewyth, i. 42, _regrets_.

  Rewth, i. 174, _ruth_, _pity_.

  Riall, _royal_.

  Richt, i. 101, _right_.

  Riddle, _vulgar idiom for unriddle, or corruption of reade_, _to advise_.

  Rin, i. 147;
    rinn, i. 60, _run_;
    rins, i. 59, _runs_;
    rinnes, i. 42, _runs_.

  Rise, _shoot_, _bush_, _shrub_.

  Rive, i. 244, _rend_;
    rives, i. 284;
    _rends_.

  Rive, ii. 386, _rife_, _abounding_.

  Roche, i. 128, _rock_.

  Rofe, ii. 41, _roof_.

  Roke, i. 48, _steam or smoke_.

  Ronne, _ran_;
    roone, _run_.

  Roo, i. 42, _roe_.

  Roode, i. 76, _cross_, _crucifix_.

  Rood loft, _the place in the church where the images were set up_.

  Room, i. 84, _large_.

  Roun, ii. 80, _run_.

  Route, i. 158, _company_.

  Route, iii. 108, _go about_, _travel_.

  Routhe, i. 122, _ruth_, _pity_.

  Row, i. 145;
    rowd, i. 60,146, _roll_, _rolled_.

  Rowght, i. 45;
    rowte, ii. 26, _rout_.

  Rowyned, _round_.

  Rowned, rownyd, _whispered_.

  Rudd, iii. 8, _red_, _ruddy_;
   rud-red, iii. 22.

  Rude, ii. 82;
    _rood_, _cross_.

  Ruell bones, ii. 22.

  Rues, _pitieth_.

  Rugged, ii. 27, _pulled with violence_.

  Runnagate, ii. 294, _runaway_.

  Rushy gair, ii. 86, _rushy strip of land_.

  Ruthe, ii. 46, _pity_, _woe_.

  Ryal, ii. 30;
    ryall, i. 45, 129, _royal_.

  Ryd, iii. 36, _rode_;
    rydand, ii. 22, _riding_.

  Ryde, i. 91, _for ryse_ (?)

  Rydere, i. 178, _ranger_.

  Ryghtwes, i. 427, _righteous_.

  Ryhte, ii. 9, _right_.

  Rynde, i. 46, _rent_, _flayed_.

  Ryschys, ii. 27, _rushes_.

  Rywe, ii. 30, _rue_.

  Ryyt, ii. 20, _right_;
    _even_, ii. 23.


  Sa, i. 144, ii. 26;
    sae, i. 144, _so_.

  Safer, _sapphire_.

  Saft, ii. 110, _soft_;
    saftly, ii. 107, _softly_.

  Saif, i. 144, _safe_.

  Saim, iii. 99, _same_.

  Sair, i. 60, 147, _sore_.

  Saisede, ii. 8, _seized_.

  Sall, i. 60, 84, 143, _shall_.

  Salvage, iii. 117, _savage_.

  Sar, i. 31, _sore_.

  Sarke, iii. 95, _shirt_;
    _shift_, i. 321.

  Sat, i. 31, _set_.

  Sauls, ii. 114, _souls_.

  Saut, iii. 99, _salt_.

  Saw, say, _speech_, _discourse_.

  Say, i. 30, _saw_.

  Saye, iii. 64, _essay_, _attempt_.

  Say us no harme, _say no ill of us_.

  Say'n, ii. 69, _saying_.

  Scant, i. 90, 321, _scarce_.

  Scath, i. 65, _hurt_, _injury_.

  Schadow, ii. 25, _shadow_.

  Schal, ii. 20;
    schall, i. 42, _shall_.

  Schapen, ii. 24, _shaped_.

  Schapped, i. 48, _swapped_ (?), _i.e. smote_.

  Scharpe, i. 46, 48, _sharp_.

  Schatred, ii. 25, _shattered_.

  Schaw, ii. 82, _show_.

  Sche, i. 42, ii. 24, _she_.

  Schene, _sheen_, also _brightness_.

  Schepeskynnes, ii. 21, _sheepskins_.

  Schip, i. 100, _ship_;
    schiples, _shipless_.

  Scho, i. 59, ii. 20, _she_.

  Schone, i. 41, _shone_.

  Schoone, i. 101, _shoes_.

  Schoote, i. 45, _shot_, _let go_.

  Schowte, i. 47;
    schowtte, _shout_.

  Schrill, _shrill_.

  Schuke, _shook_.

  Schuld, ii. 20;
    schulde, i. 46, _should_.

  Schulder, ii. 27, _shoulder_.

  Sckill, iii. 327, _skill_.

  Sckirmish, ii. 236, _skirmish_.

  Sckore, ii. 236, _score_.

  Sclat, ii. 16, _slate_.

  Scomfet, ii. 23, _discomfit_.

  Scorke, i. 259, _struck_.

  Scot, ii. 9, _tax_, _revenue_;
    also _shot_, _reckoning_, ii. 20.

  See, ii. 8, _sea_.

  Sed, iii. 47, _said_.

  Seely, ii. 174;
    seelie, iii. 68, _poor_, _simple_.

  Seignour, ii. 135, _Lord_.

  Seik, i. 60, _seek_.

  Seires, iii. 328, _for feires_, _i.e. mates_.

  Sek-ful, ii. 22, _sackful_.

  Sel, iii. 96;
    sell, iii. 123, _self_.

  Selcouthe, ii. 391, _strange_.

  Selven, ii. 32, _self_.

  Selver, ii. 8, _silver_.

  Sely, ii. 53, _simple_.

  Semblyd, i. 25, _assembled_.

  Sen, i. 34, ii. 83, iii. 95, _since_.

  Seneschall, _steward_.

  Senvy, _mustard seed_. Fr. senevé.

  Serrett, i. 79, _closed fist_ (?)

  Sertayne, i. 48, _certain_;
    sertenly, i. 49, 50, _certainly_.

  Sese, ii. 49, _seize_.

  Setywall, _the herb valerian_.

  Sey, iii. 75, _a kind of woollen stuff_.

  Sey yow, ii. 15, _say to you_;
    I sey yow soth, ii. 16, _I tell you truth_.

  Sey'd, ii. 114, _tried_.

  Sey'd, _saw_.

  Seyde, ii. 12, _said_.

  Sha' na bide, ii. 116, _shall not endure_.

  Shaint, ii. 360, _saint_.

  Shave;
    be shave, ii. 77, _be shaven_.

  Shaw, ii. 114, _show_;
    shaw'd, ii. 110, _showed_.

  Shaws, i. 106, _little woods_.

  Shear, i. 24, _entirely_.

  Sheede, iii. 12, _shed_.

  Sheel, ii. 98;
    sheele, i. 88, 294, _she'll_, _she will_.

  Sheene, i. 87, 106;
    iii. 236, _bright_, _brightness_, _beauty_.
    Germ. _schön_.

  Shees, ii. 70, _she is_.

  Sheeve, ii. 256, _shive_, _a great slice of bread_.

  Sheip, ii. 82, _sheep_;
    sheips heid, ii. 132, _sheep's head_.

  Sheits, i. 145, _sheets_.

  Sheid, ii. 70, _she would_.

  Shent, i. 72, 171, _disgraced_;
    _abashed_, ii. 49;
    _confounded_, ii. 84.

  Shepenes, iii. 208, _cowhouses_, _sheep pens_. A.-S. scypen.

  Shield bone, _the blade bone_, a common phrase in the north.

  Shill, ii. 111, _shrill_.

  Shimmer'd, iii. 237, _glittered_;
    shimmering, ii. 142, _shining by glances_, _glittering_.

  Sho, ii. 49, _she_.

  Shoen, ii. 100, _shoes_.

  Shold, sholde, _should_.

  Shoone, i. 243, 320;
    iii. 47, _shoes_.

  Shope, iii. 54, _shaped_.

  Shorte, ii. 43, _shorten_.

  Shote, ii. 40, _shoot_.

  Shott, ii. 149, _reckoning_.

  Shoul, ii. 360, _soul_.

  Shradds, i. 106, _twigs_.

  Shreeven, iii. 10, _shriven_, _confessed_.

  Shreward, ii. 9, _a male shrew_.

  Shrive, ii. 60, _confess_;
    _hear confession_,  ii. 166.

  Shroggs, i. 111, _shrubs_, _thorns_, _briars_.

  Shuld, iii. 147;
    shulde, i. 32, _should_.

  Shullen, _shall_.

  Shunted, ii. 137, _shunned_.

  Shuntyng, ii. 19, _recreation_, _diversion_, _sport_.

  Shyars, i. 24, _shires_.

  Shynand, ii. 113, _shining_.

  Sib, _kin_, _akin_.

  Sic, i. 84;
    sich, i. 327, _such_.

  Sich, ii. 84, _sigh_;
    sichit, ii. 81, sicht, ii. 86, _sighed_.

  Sicht, ii. 114, _sight_.

  Sick-like, iii. 123, _such like_.

  Side, i. 375, _long_.

  Sied, i. 147, _saw_.

  Sigh clout, i. 197, _a cloth to strain milk through_.

  Sighan, iii. 134, _sighing_.

  Sik, i. 144;
    sike, i. 320, _such_.

  Siker, i. 323, _secure_, _surely_, _certainly_.

  Silk, iii. 100, _such_.

  Siller, ii. 230;
    iii. 97, _silver_.

  Silly, i. 192;
    ii. 68, _simple_.

  Silven, iii. 100, _silver_.

  Sindle, ii. 115, _seldom_.

  Sist, iii. 55, _sighed_.

  Sith, i. 68, 133, _since_.

  Sitten, iii. 99, _sat_.

  Sitteth, ii. 7, _sit ye_.

  Skaith, ii. 115, _scath_, _harm_, _mischief_.

  Skinker, _one that serves drink_.

  Skinkled, iii. 237, _glittered_.

  Skore, i. 28, _score_.

  Slade, i. 108, _a breadth of greensward between ploughlands or woods_.

  Slaited, iii. 98, _wiped_.

  Slatred, ii. 25, _broke into splinters_.

  Slaw, i. 308, _slew_.

  Slaw, ii. 107, _slow_.

  Sle, i. 15, _slay_;
    sleest, _slayest_, i. 123.

  Slee, ii. 69, _sly_.

  Slean, i. 31, 33, 34, _slain_.

  Sleath, iii. 108, _slayeth_.

  Slein, ii. 70, _slain_.

  Sleip, i. 60;
    sleipe, ii. 211, _sleep_.

  Sleive, iii. 95, _sleeve_.

  Slo, i. 120;
    sloe, i. 69, _slay_.

  Slode, i. 66, 79, slit, _split_.

  Slone, i. 49, 67, _slain_.

  Sloughe, i. 28, _slew_.

  Sma', i. 145, _small_;
    _little_, iii. 95.

  Smire, iii. 327 (? for swire = neck).

  Smithers, i. 145, _smothers_.

  Snae, iii. 97;
    snaw, ii. 69, _snow_.

  Soar, i. 31, _sore_.

  Sodenly, ii. 15, _suddenly_.

  Solacious, i. 130;
    _affording solace_.

  Soldan, i. 73, 74, 80;
    sowdan, i. 96, _sultan_.

  Soll, i. 34, _soul_.

  Son, ii. 23, _soon_;
    sone, ii. 44, _soon_.

  Sond, ii. 26, sending, _present_.

  Sone, ii. 41, _soon_.

  Soothe, ii. 55, _truth_, _true_.

  Sort, i. 122, 126, _set_, _company_.

  Soth, i. 43, 49, 50, 51;
    ii. 16;
    iii. 30, _truth_, _true_.

  Sothe, i. 27, _south_.

  Sould, ii. 69, _should_.

  Souldan, iii. 110, _sultan_.

  Souling, ii. 257, _victualling_.

  Sowle is still used in the north for anything eaten with bread. P.

  Souse, iii. 181, _the head, feet and ears of swine boiled and
    pickled for eating_.

  Souter, i. 416, _psaltry_.

  Sowne, ii. 52, _sound_.

  Sowre, _sour_.

  Sowre, _sore_.

  Sowter, i. 416, _a shoemaker_.

  Soy, i. 320, _silk_.

  Spack, ii. 230;
    iii. 96, _spake_.

  Spec, ii. 13, _spake_.

  Speere, ii. 144;
    speered, ii. 144, _sparred_, _fastened_, _shut_.

  So in an old "Treatyse agaynst Pestilence, etc. 4to Emprynted by
  Wynkyn de Worde:" we are exhorted to "Spere [i.e. shut or bar] the
  wyndowes ayenst the south." fol. 5. P.

  Speid, iii. 94, _speed_.

  Speik, iii. 96, _speak_.

  Speir, ii. 69;
    iii. 95, _ask_, _inquire_.

  So Chaucer, in his Rhyme of Sir Thopas--

    ----"He foughte north and south,
    And oft he spired with his mouth."

  _i.e._ "inquired." Not spied, as in the new edit. of Cant. Tales,
  vol. ii. p. 234. P.

  Speir, iii. 98, _spear_.

  Spek, ii. 12, _spoke_;
    speken, iii. 207, _speak_.

  Spence, ii. 52;
    spens, ii. 21, _expense_.

  Spendyd, _grasped_.

  Spill, i. 196, iii. 51;
    spille, i. 75, _spoil_, _kill_.

  Spillan, iii. 134, _spilling_.

  Spindles and whorles, ii. 71, _the instruments used for spinning
    in Scotland instead of spinning-wheels_.

  "The Rock, Spindles, and Whorles are very much used in Scotland and
  the northern parts of Northumberland at this time. The thread for
  shoemakers, and even some linen webs, and all the twine of which
  the Tweed salmon-nets are made, are spun upon spindles. They are
  said to make a more even and smooth thread than spinning-wheels."
  (_Mr. Lambe._) P.

  Spittle, ii. 282, _hospital_.

  Splene;
    on the splene, ii. 46, _in haste_.

  Spole, ii. 198, _shoulder_.

  Sporeles, ii. 9, _spurless_, _without spurs_.

  Sprente, i. 29, _spurted out_, _sprung out_.

  Sprite, iii. 132, _spirit_.

  Spurging, ii. 197, _drivelling froth_.

  Spurn, i. 34, _a kick_.

  Spylt, i. 123, _spoiled_, _destroyed_.

  Squelsh, iii. 295, _a blow or bang_.

  Squyer, ii. 44;
    squyere, ii. 44, _squire_.

  Stalworth, ii. 19, _stout_.

  Stalwurthlye, i. 41, _stoutly_.

  Stane, i. 145, _stone_.

  Starke, i. 72, _stout_, _strong_.

  Startopes, ii. 256, _buskins or half boots_.

  Stean, i. 103, iii. 99, _stone_.

  Stede, ii. 23, _place_.

  Steid, i. 83, iii. 98, _steed_.

  Steill, ii. 131, _steel_.

  Steir, ii. 83, _stir_.

  Stel, ii. 8, _steel_.

  Stele, ii. 46, _steal_.

  Sterne, i. 28, _fierce ones_.

  Sterris, _stars_.

  Sterte, i. 69, 73, _start_;
    sterted, iii. 15, _started_.

  Sterve, ii. 16, _die_, _perish_.

  Steven, i. 115, iii. 26, _voice_, _sound_.

  Steven, i. 111, _time_.

  Stint, i. 68, 133, 273, _stop_, _stopped_.

  Stond, ii. 26, _stand_.

  Stonderes, _standers by_.

  Stonds, i. 44, _stands_.

  Stound, i. 165, _hour_.

  Stounde, i. 48, _time_;
    _for awhile_, ii. 11.

  Stoup, ii. 117, _stoop_.

  Stoup of weir, ii. 115, _a pillar of war_.

  Stour, i. 31, 96;
    stower, i. 66, iii. 26;
    stowre, i. 49, 74, 168, iii. 14, _strong_, _fierce_, _stir_, _fight_.

  This word is applied in the North to signify dust agitated and put
  in motion, as by the sweeping of a room, &c. P.

  Stown, ii. 69, _stolen_.

  Stra, ii. 24;
    strae, ii. 69, iii. 98, _straw_.

  Strake, ii. 117, _struck_.

  Strekene, i. 29, _stricken_, _struck_.

  Stret, _street_.

  Strick, i. 322, _strict_.

  Strike, _stricken_.

  Stroke, i. 28;
    stroken, i. 228, _struck_.

  Strout, iii. 119, _strut_.

  Stude, i. 143, iii. 95, _stood_.

  Styntyde, i. 30, _stinted_, _stayed_, _stopped_.

  Styrande, i. 40, _stirring_.

  Styrt, ii. 26, _started_.

  Suar, i. 28, 30, _sure_.

  Suld, ii. 21, _should_.

  Sum, i. 83, 146, ii. 25, _some_.

  Summere, iii. 108, _a sumpter horse_.

  Sumpters, i. 302, _horses that carry clothes, furniture, &c._

  Sune, _soon_.

  Surmount, iii. 172, _surpass_.

  Suore bi ys chyn, ii. 9, _sworn by his chin_.

  Supprised, i. 124, _overpowered_.

  Suraunce, ii. 49, _assurance_.

  Suthe, ii. 386, _soon_, _quickly_.

  Swa, ii. 24, _so_.

  Swage, ii. 342, _assuage_;
    swaged, ii. 180, _assuaged_.

  Swapte, i. 29;
    _swapped_, i. 48, _struck violently_, _exchanged blows_.

  Sware, ii. 12, ii. 361, _swearing_, _oath_.

  Swarned, ii. 206, _climbed_.

  Swarved, ii. 197, _climbed_, _swarmed_.

  To swarm, in the midland counties, is to draw oneself up a tree or
  any other thing, clinging to it with the legs and arms. P.

  Swat, i. 29, _did sweat_.

  Swear, _sware_.

  Swearde, ii. 128, _sword_.

  Sweaven, i. 106, ii. 63;
    sweven, ii. 56, _a dream_.

  Sweere, iii. 21, _neck_.

  Sweit, iii. 74;
    swete, ii. 19, _sweet_;
    sweitly, ii. 212, _sweetly_.

  Swepyls, ii. 25,

  "a swepyl is that staff of the flail with which the corn is beaten
  out. Vulg. a supple (called in the midland counties a swindgell,
  where the other part is termed the hand-staff)." P.

  Swerdes, ii. 8, _swords_.

  Swiche, i. 430, _such_.

  Swith, i. 96, ii. 119, _quickly_, _instantly_, _at once_.

  Swound, i. 240, 296, ii. 179, _swoon_.

  Swyke, _sigh_.

  Swynkers, ii. 19, _labourers_.

  Swyppyng, ii. 25, _striking fast_.

  Swyving, ii. 8, _wenching_, _lechery_.

  Sych, ii. 19, _such_.

  Syd, _side_;
    on sydis shear, i. 25, _on all sides_.

  Syn, ii. 16, _since_.

  Syne, i. 43, ii. 114, iii. 147, _then_, _afterwards_.

  Syns, _since_.

  Syschemell, ii. 74, _Ishmael_.

  Syth, ii. 38, _since_.

  Syyt, ii. 27, _sight_.


  Taiken, ii. 118, _taken_.

  Tain, iii. 94;
    taine, i. 59, _taken_.

  Tane, i. 289, ii. 193, _taken_.

  Tane, iii. 238, _the one_.

  Tarbox, ii. 256, _box containing tar for anointing sores in sheep, &c._

  Targe, ii. 53, _target_, _shield_.

  Tauld, ii. 109, _told_.

  Tayne, i. 50, _taken_.

  Te, ii. 7, _to_;
    te-knowe, ii. 11, _to know_;
    te-make, _to make_.

  Te-he, ii. 26, _interjection of laughing_.

  Tear, i. 34, _tearing or pulling_.

  Teene, i. 162, _vexation_;
    i. 284, 291, _injury_;
    iii. 194, _trouble_;
    teenefu, i. 147, _wrathful_.

  Teene, i. 77, _vex_.

  Teir, i. 101, _tear_.

  Tene, i. 120, _wrath_.

  Tenebrus, i. 128, _dark_.

  Tent, ii. 83, _heed_.

  Termagaunt, i. 85, 96, _the god of the Saracens_.

  The old French Romancers, who had corrupted _Termagant_ into
  _Tervagant_, couple it with the name of Mahomet as constantly as
  ours; thus in the old _Roman de Blanchardin_,

    "Cy guerpison tuit Apolin,
    Et Mahomet et _Tervagant_."

  Hence La Fontaine, with great humour, in his Tale, intitled _La_
  _Fiancée du Roy de Garbe_, says,

    "Et reniant Mahom, Jupin, et _Tervagant_,
    Avec maint autre Dieu non moins extravagant."

  --_Mem. de l'Acad. des Inscript. tom._ 20, 4to. p. 352.

  As _Termagant_ is evidently of Anglo-Saxon derivation and can
  only be explained from the elements of that language, its being
  corrupted by the old French Romancers proves that they borrowed
  some things from ours. P.

  Terrene, iii. 299, _earthly_.

  Terry, ii. 19, _Thierry_, or a _diminutive of Terence_.

  Tester, iii. 206, _teston, or sixpence_.

  Tha, ii. 26, _them_.

  Thah, ii. 7, _though_.

  Thair, ii. 82, iii. 99, _there_.

  Tham, ii. 21;
    thame, i. 84, 102, 146, _them_.

  Than, i. 145, 206, _then_.

  Thanns, ii. 25, _thence_.

  Thay, i. 321, _they_.

  Thaym, ii. 23, _them_.

  Thayr, ii. 21, _their_.

  The, _they_;
    the wear, i. 29, _they were_.

  The, i. 189, ii. 13, _thee_.

  The God, ii. 30, _contraction for the_ he (_i.e. high_) God. P.

  Thear, i. 33, _there_;
    i. 29, _their_.

  Theder, ii. 19;
    thedyr, ii. 28, _thither_.

  Thee, ii. 97, _thrive_;
    so mote I thee, ii. 97, _so may I thrive_.

  So in Chaucer, _Cant. Tales_, vol. i. p. 308, "God let him never
  _the_." P.

  Then, _than_.

  Ther, ii. 21;
    _there_ i. 289, _their_.

  Ther, ii. 23, _where_.

  Thes, ii. 19, _these_.

  Thether, i. 41, _thither_.

  They, i. 78, _the_.

  Theyther-ward, _thitherward_, _towards that place_.

  Thie, _thy_.

  Thii, ii. 386, _they_.

  Thilke, ii. 14, _this_.

  Thir, ii. 69, _this_, _these_;
    thir towmonds, ii. 82, _these twelve months_.

  Tho, i. 207, _then_;
    _those_, ii. 39.

  Thocht, iii. 94, _thought_.

  Thole, ii. 119, _suffer_.

  Thore, ii. 13, _there_.

  Thorow, ii. 30;
    thorrow, i. 291, _through_;
    thorowout, ii. 15, _throughout_.

  Thouse, i. 198, _thou art_;
    _thou shalt_, iii. 131.

  Thoust, i. 289, _thou shalt or shouldst_.

  Thowe, _thou_.

  Thrall, i. 297, ii. 79, _captive_,;
    _captivity_, i. 75, 135;
    ii. 256.

  Thrang, ii. 115, _throng_;
    _close_, ii. 69.

  Thraste, iii. 216, _thrust_.

  Thrawis, _throes_.

  Thrawn, ii. 115, _thrown_.

  Threape, i. 198, _to argue_, _to affirm or assert in a positive
    overbearing manner_.

  Threven, ii. 133, _thrived_.

  Threw, ii. 214, _drew_.

  Threw, iii. 238, _thrived_.

  Thrie, _three_.

  Thrif, _thrive_.

  Thrild upon a pinn, iii. 47, _twirled or twisted the door pin_.

  Thrittè, i. 34, _thirty_;
    thritti thou sent, ii. 7, _thirty thousand_.

  Thronge, i. 163, _hastened_.

  Thropes, iii. 208, _villages_.

  Through-girt, ii. 78, _pierced through_.

  Throw, iii. 134, _through_.

  Thruch, throuch, _through_.

  Thrughe, _through_.

  Thrustand, ii. 23, _thrusting_.

  Thryes, ii. 23, _thrice_.

  Thrysse, i. 47, _thrice_.

  Thud, ii. 119, _dull sound_.

  Tickle, ii. 299, _uncertain_.

  Tift, iii. 237, _puff of wind_.

  Till, i. 33, 65, 143, ii. 82, _unto_.

  Till, i. 94, _entice_.

  Timkin, _diminutive of Timothy_.

  Tine, i. 64, _lose_;
    tint, i. 71;
    ii. 363, _lost_.

  Tirled at the pin, iii. 131, _twirled or twisted the door pin_.

  Tividale, i. 25, _Teviotdale_.

  To, _too_, _two_.

  Tokenyng, ii. 22, _token_.

  Tomkyn, ii. 19, _diminutive of Thomas_.

  To-flatred, ii. 25, _slit_.

  To-rente, iii. 356, _rent_.

  To-schatred, ii. 25, _shattered_.

  To-slatered, ii. 25, _splintered_.

  Tone, i. 42, 87, iii. 103, _the one_.

  Too-fall, ii. 365, _twilight_.

  "Too-fall of the night" seems to be an image drawn from a suspended
  canopy, so let fall as to cover what is below. (_Mr. Lambe._) P.

  Tooken, i. 274, _took_.

  Tor, _a tower_;
    also _a high pointed rock or hill_.

  Torn, i. 187, _turn_.

  Tothar, i. 31, _the other_.

  Tother, i. 87, _the other_.

  Toun, i. 143;
    town, i. 321, _dwelling-house_.

  Tow, i. 145, _to let down with a rope_;
    towd, i. 146, _let down_.

  Tow, i. 106;
    towe, i. 31, 87, _two_.

  Towmonds, ii. 82, _twelve months_.

  Towyn, i. 41, _town_.

  Traitorye, i. 283, 289, ii. 309;
    traytery, ii. 224, _treason_.

  Tre, i. 28, ii. 13, _wood_;
    i. 30, _staff_.

  Tree, i. 291, _ill_.

  Trewest, ii. 11, _truest_.

  Treytory, i. 124, _treachery_.

  Trichard, ii. 7, _treacherous_.

  Tricthen (should be trichen), ii. 7, _deceive_.

  Triest furth, iii. 94, _draw forth to an assignation_.

  Trifulcate, _three forked_, _three pointed_.

  Trippand, ii. 27, _tripping_.

  Trim, i. 191, _exact_.

  Troate, ii. 360, _throat_.

  Trogh, ii. 24, _trough_.

  Trone, yn trone, i. 43, _enthroned_.

  Troth, iii. 131, _truth_, _faith_, _fidelity_;
    trothles, i. 201, _faithless_.

  Trough, trouth, _troth_.

  Trouth plyyt, ii. 27, _truth plight_.

  Trow, ii. 95, _true_.

  Trow, iii. 96;
    trowe, i. 270, _believe_, _trust_, also _verily_.

  Trumped, _boasted_, _told bragging lies_;
    a trump, _a lie_.

  Tuik, i. 322, _took_.

  Tuke gude keip, ii. 84, _took good watch_.

  Tull, i. 320;
    for till, _to_.

  Tup, ii. 257, _ram_.

  Turn, such turn, _such an occasion_.

  Turnes a crab, ii. 258, _roasts a crab apple_.

  Tush, ii. 57, _tusk_.

  Twa, i. 320;
    ii. 26, _two_.

  Twatling, iii. 187, _trifling_.

  Twaw, i. 27, _two_.

  Twayne, ii. 37, _two_.

  Twin'd, i. 59, _parted in two_.

  Twirtle twist, ii. 112, _twirled twist_.

  Twyes, ii. 23, _twice_.

  Tyb, ii. 20, _the diminutive of Isabel_.

  Tyll. com the tyll, i. 42, _come unto thee_.

  Tyrry, ii. 26. See _Terry_.


  Uch, ii. 14, _each_.

  Ugsome, _shocking_, _horrible_.

  'Um, iii. 333, _them_.

  Unbethought, iii. 51, for _bethought_.

  Undermeles, iii. 208, _afternoons_.

  Undight, i. 309, _undecked_.

  Unfeeled, _opened_, a term in falconry.

  Unhap, ii. 77, _mishap_.

  Unkempt, ii. 77, _uncombed_.

  Unmacklye, i. 73, 80, _mis-shapen_.

  Unmufit, _undisturbed_.

  Unright, ii. 191, _wrong_.

  Unsett steven, i. 111, _unappointed time_, _unexpectedly_.

  Unsonsie, ii. 116, _unlucky_, _unfortunate_.

  Untill, iii. 49;
    untyll, i. 162, _unto_.

  Upo, ii. 70, _upon_.

  Ure, iii. 262, _use_.

  Uthers, ii. 86, _others_.


  Vaints, ii. 289, _faints_.

  Vair, ii. 286, _fair_.

  Valeies, ii. 41, _valleys_.

  Vart, ii. 286, _fart_.

  Vazen, ii. 286, for _faith_.

  Vellow, ii. 286;
    vellowe, ii. 287, _fellow_.

  Venge, ii. 117, _revenge_.

  Venu, iii. 356, _approach_, _coming_.

  Verament, i. 25, 28, _truly_.

  Vices, i. 129, _devices_.

  Vilane, _rascally_.

  Vitayle, ii. 42, _victual_.

  Vive, ii. 386, _five_.

  Vools, ii. 288, _fools_;
    voolish, ii. 288, _foolish_.

  Vor, ii. 286, _for_.

  Vorty, ii. 287, _forty_.

  Vourteen, ii. 287, _fourteen_.

  Voyded, i. 166, _quitted_, _left the place_.

  Vrier, ii. 286, _friar_.


  Wa, i. 142, 143, ii. 109, iii. 93, 95, _wall_.

  Wache, i. 43, _a spy_.

  Wad, i. 60, 145, 321, _would_.

  Wadded, iii. 7, _light-blue or woad-coloured_.

  Wadna, ii. 13, _would not_.

  Wae, i. 83, 320, _woe_;
    waefo', iii. 100;
    waefu', ii. 110, _woeful_.

  Wae worth, i. 145, 322, _woe betide_.

  Wald, i. 145;
    walde, iii. 94, _would_.

  Walker, iii. 8, _a fuller of cloth_.

  Walowit, ii. 119, _faded_, _withered_.

  Waltering, i. 75, ii. 119, _weltering_;
    waltred, _tumbled or rolled about_.

  Waly, iii. 147, _an interjection of lamentation_.

  Wame, iii. 238, _womb_, _belly_.

  Wan, i. 72, 244;
    ii. 26, _won_.

  Wan near, ii. 120, _drew near_.

  Wane, i. 29, _the same as_ ane, _one_, _so_ wone _is one_.

  In fol. 355 of Bannatyne's MS. is a short fragment, in which "wane"
  is used for "ane" or "one," viz.:--

    "Amongst the monsters that we find,
    There's _wane_ belovved of woman-kind,
    Renowned for antiquity,
    From Adame drivs his pedigree." P.

  The word wane in the text, however, is probably a misreading for
  mane.

  Wanrufe, ii. 83, _uneasy_.

  War, i. 25, _aware_.

  War ant wys, ii. 11, _wary and wise_.

  Ward, ii. 120, _watch_, _sentinel_, _warder_.

  Warde, iii. 97, _advise_, _forewarn_.

  Ware, i. 43, 107, 158, _aware_.

  Ware, i. 306, _wore_.

  Ware, iii. 238, _were_.

  Warke, _work_.

  Warld, ii. 85, _world_;
    warldis, i. 84, _worlds_.

  Waryd, ii. 20, _accursed_.

  Waryson, i. 46, _reward_.

  Wassel, iii. 27, _drinking_, _good cheer_.

  Wat, i. 322, ii. 68, _wet_.

  Wat, i. 27, _know_.

  Wate, iii. 97, _blamed_. (Preterite of _wyte_, to blame.)

  Wauld, iii. 95, _would_.

  Wayde, _waved_.

  Wayed, iii. 195, _weighed_.

  Weal, i. 33, _wail_.

  Weale, _well_.

  Wear, i. 29, _were_.

  Wear-in, iii. 74, _drive in gently_.

  Wearifu', ii. 70, _wearisome_, _troublesome_, _tiresome_, _disturbing_.

  Weddeen, iii. 236, _wedding_.

  Wedder, ii. 83, _weather_.

  Wede, ii. 21, _clothing_.

  Wedous, i. 33, _widows_.

  Wee, ii. 69, _little_.

  Weede, iii. 59, _clothing_, _dress_;
    weeds, i. 88, 246, _garments_.

  Weell, iii. 51, _we'll_, _we will_.

  Weel, ii. 132;
    weele, i. 150, _well_.

  Weel-faur'd, ii. 139, _well-favoured_.

  Weene, i. 193, _think_;
    ween'd, i. 143;
    weened, ii. 80;
    weende, ii. 96, _thought_.

  Weete, i. 101, ii. 216, _wet_.

  Weet, ii. 95, _know_.

  Weids, ii. 364, _cloathing_.

  Weil, i. 145, _well_.

  Weip, i. 60;
    weipe, ii. 211, _weep_.

  Weir, ii. 115, _war_.

  Weird, iii. 224, _witch-like_.

  Weit, ii. 231, _wet_.

  Wel longe, ii. 13, _very long_.

  Wel-awaye, iii. 128, _an interjection of grief_.

  Weldynge, _ruling_.

  Wele, ii. 24, _well_.

  Welkin, iii. 201, _the sky_.

  Wem, iii. 303, _spot_.

  Wem, iii. 357, _hurt_.

  Weme, i. 284, 291, _hollow_.

  Wend, i. 156, ii. 13, _go_.

  Wend, ii. 85;
    wende, i. 170, _thought_;
    wende do, ii. 8, _thought to do_.

  Wenden, ii. 12, _go_.

  Went, i. 164, _thought_.

  Wer, iii. 134, _were_.

  Wereth, _defendeth_.

  Werke, i. 163, 306, _work_.

  Werre, ii. 11, _war_.

  Werryed, ii. 65, _worried_.

  Wes, ii. 8, _was_.

  Westlin, ii. 120, _western_.

  Westlings, _whistling_.

  Wete, i. 31, _wet_.

  Wether, iii. 328, _whether_.

  Wex, iii. 238, _wax_, _grow_.

  Wha, ii. 71, _who_.

  Whair, ii. 69, _where_;
    whair-eir, ii. 212, _wherever_.

  Wham, ii. 11, _whom_.

  Whan, i. 318, _when_.

  Whang, ii. 70, _a large slice_.

  Wheder, ii. 37, _whither_.

  Whelyng, ii. 49, _wheeling_.

  Whig, i. 299, ii. 256, _sour whey_, _buttermilk_.

  While, _until_.

  Whilk, ii. 71, _which_.

  Whirry, iii. 202, _laugh_.

  Whittles, _knives_.

  Whoard, i. 214, _hoard_.

  Whorles (see spindles).

  Whyll, i. 48, _while_.

  Whyllys, i. 30, _whilst_.

  Wi', ii. 68, _with_.

  Wight, i. 63, 65, 72, 191, _man_, _human being_.

  Wight, i. 107, 288, _strong_, _lusty_.

  Wightlye, i. 64, 78, _swiftly_, _vigorously_.

  Wighty, i. 106, 147;
    wightye, i. 161, _strong_, _active_.

  Wild-worme, iii. 30, 36, _serpent_.

  Wildings, ii. 257, _wild or crab apples_.

  Wilfull, i. 110, _ignorant_.

  Windar, iii. 302, _a kind of hawk_.

  Windling, _winding_.

  Winna, iii. 96;
    winnae, i. 59, 144, _will not_.

  Winyard, iii. 297, _long knife or short cutlass_.

  Winsome, i. 323, ii. 70, 363, _agreeable_, _engaging_.

  Wirk, ii. 83, _do_.

  Wis, i. 269, _know_;
    wist, i. 72, iii. 148, _knew_.

  Witchd, iii. 24, _bewitched_.

  Withouten, i. 126;
    withowtten, i. 41;
    withowghten, i. 40, 43, _without_.

  Wive, ii. 255, _marry_.

  Wo, ii. 81, 86, _woe_.

  Wobster, ii. 131, _webster_, _weaver_.

  Wod, ii. 82;
    wode, i. 122, 160, 163, _mad_, _wild_.

  Wod, iii. 94;
    wode, i. 156, ii. 37, _wood_.

  Wodewarde, ii. 43, _towards the wood_.

  Woe-man, _a sorrowful man_.

  Woe worth, ii. 215, _woe be to thee_.

  Wolden, i. 274, _would_.

  Woll, ii. 24, _wool_.

  Wolle, ii. 38, _will_.

  Won, ii. 49, _wont_, _usage_.

  Won'd, i. 306, _dwelt_.

  Wonde, wounde, _winded_.

  Wonders, _wondrous_.

  Wondersly, i. 125, _wondrously_.

  Wone, i. 31, _one_.

  Wonne, _dwell_.

  Woo, i. 28, _woe_.

  Wood, i. 145, ii. 145;
    woode, iii. 57, _mad_, _furious_.

  Wood-wroth, iii. 238, _furiously enraged_.

  Woodweele, i. 106, _the golden ouzle_, _a bird of the thrush kind_.

  Worm, iii. 30, 36, _serpent_.

  Worship, i. 121, _honour_.

  Worshipfully frended, _of worshipful friends_.

  Wot, i. 69;
    wott, ii. 139, _know_;
    wotes, i. 219, _knows_.

  Wouche, i. 28, _mischief_, _wrong_.

  Wowe, i. 300, _woo_.

  Wow, iii. 75, _who_.

  Wow, ii. 22, _vow_.

  Wrack, i. 296;
    wracke, iii. 41, _wreck_, _ruin_, _destruction_;
    wracked, iii. 117, _wrecked_.

  Wrang, i. 147, _wrung_.

  Wrange, i. 41, _wrong_.

  Wreake, ii. 135, _pursue revengefully_.

  Wrench, ii. 81, 86, _wretchedness_.

  Wringe, i. 122, _to contend with violence_.

  Writhe, i. 286, _writhed_, _twisted_.

  Wroken, i. 106, 147, _revenged_.

  Wrong, i. 166, _wrung_.

  Wrotyn, ii. 22, _wrought_.

  Wrouyt, ii. 30, _wrought_.

  Wry, ii. 49, _turn aside_.

  Wul, i. 83, 143;
    wull, iii. 235, _will_.

  Wych, i. 44, _which_.

  Wyld, i. 24, _wild deer_.

  Wynn ther haye, i. 40, _gather in their hay_.

  Wynne, i. 43, ii. 20, _joy_, _pleasure_.

  Wynne, iii. 279, _heard_.

  Wynnen, ii. 12, _win_, _gain_.

  Wyrch wyselyer, ii. 24, _work more wisely_.

  Wysse, ii. 12, 14, _teach_, _govern_.

  Wyst, ii. 26;
    wyste, i. 25, _knew_.

  Wyt, _know_;
    wyt wold I, ii. 20, _know would I_.

  Wyte, iii. 97, _blame_.


  Y, ii. 12, _I_;
    y singe, ii. 11, _I sing_.

  Y-beare, ii. 57, _bear_;
    y-boren, ii. 8, _borne_.

  Y-bent, _bent_.

  Y-built, iii. 272, _built_.

  Y-cald, iii. 374, _called_.

  Y-chesyled, i. 129, _chiselled_.

  Y-cleped, i. 326, _named_, _called_.

  Y-con'd, i. 306, _taught_, _instructed_.

  Y-core, ii. 12, _chosen_.

  Y-fere, ii. 76, _together_.

  Y-founde, ii. 13, _found_.

  Y-mad, ii. 13, _made_.

  Y-picking, i. 307, _picking_, _culling_.

  Y-slaw, i. 175, _slain_.

  Y-told, iii. 374, _told_.

  Y-were, i. 87, _were_.

  Y-wis, i. 132;
    ii. 12, _verily_.

  Y-wonne, ii. 13, _won_.

  Y-wrought, i. 306;
    iii. 275, _wrought_.

  Y-yote, ii. 14, _cast_.

  Yae, iii. 237, _each_.

  Yalping, ii. 170, _yelping_.

  Yaned, iii. 357, _yawned_.

  Yate, i. 92;
    iii. 62, _gate_;
    yates, i. 144.

  Yave, i. 272, _gave_.

  Ych, i. 31, 48;
    ycha, ii. 23, _each_, _every_.

  Ych, ii. 26, _same_.

  Ycholde, ii. 12, _I would_.

  Ychone, i. 49, _each one_.

  Ychulle, iii. 363, _I shall_.

  Ydle, _idle_.

  Yeaning, ii. 257, _bringing forth young_.

  Yearded, ii. 384, _buried_, _earthed_.

  Yeats, iii. 93, _gates_.

  Yebent, i. 28, _bent_.

  Yede, ii. 21, 44, _went_.

  Yee, _eye_.

  Yef, ii. 12, _if_.

  Yeid, ii. 81, _went_.

  Yeir, i. 101, _year_.

  Yeme, ii. 12, _take care of_, _govern_.

  Yender, _yonder_.

  Yenoughe, i. 28, 34, _enough_.

  Yent, ii. 11, _through_.

  Yerarchy, i. 126, _hierarchy_.

  Yerle, i. 26, 28, 29, 48, _earl_;
    yerlle, i. 40, 44, 49.

  Yerly, i. 24, _early_.

  Yerly, i. 440, _yearly_.

  Ye's, ii. 132;
    ye'se, iii. 134, _ye shall_.

  Yestreen, ii. 111, _last evening_.

  Yet, ii. 20, _still_.

  Yf, ii. 23, _though_.

  Ygnoraunce, i. 441, _ignorance_.

  Ying, iii. 374;
    yinge, iii. 374, _young_.

  Yit, _yet_.

  Ylk, ii. 26, _same_.

  Yll, ii. 36, _ill_.

  Ylythe, _listen_.

  Yn, ii. 9, _house_.

  Yngglishe, i. 28, 47, 50, _English_.

  Ynglonde, i. 27, 32, 34, 43, _England_.

  Ynough, i. 155, _enough_.

  Yode, iii. 67, _went_.

  Yond, i. 285;
    ii. 191;
    yonds, i. 291, _yonder_.

  Yong, i. 271;
    yonge, ii. 38, _young_.

  Youd, iii. 48, _went_.

  Youle, i. 274, 290, _you will_.

  Your lane, iii. 94, _alone_, _by yourself_.

  Youst, i. 290, _you will_.

  Yow, ii. 16, _you_.

  Ys, i. 189;
    ii. 14, _is_;
    ii. 12, _his_.

  Yt, _it_.

  Yth, i. 25, _in the_.

  Yule, ii. 229, _Christmas_.

       *       *       *       *       *

  [In several of the poems Percy used the letter z to represent
  the Anglo-Saxon character [gh], but as this is incorrect, and,
  moreover, gives rise to a very frequent mispronunciation, the z
  has been replaced by y in this edition, and several words have
  therefore been left out that occurred in the original glossary.]

       *       *       *       *       *

  Zacring bell, ii. 288, _sacring bell_,

  a little bell rung to give notice of the elevation of the host. P.

  Zaints, ii. 289, _saints_.

  Zaw, ii. 290, _saw_.

  Zay, ii. 287, _say_.

  Zee, ii. 286, _see_;
    zeene, ii. 287 _seen_.

  Zelf, ii. 287, _self_.

  Zet, ii. 289, _set_.

  Zhall, ii. 288, _shall_.

  Zhowe, ii. 288, _show_.

  Zinging, ii. 289, _singing_.

  Zmell, ii. 286, _smell_.

  Zo, ii. 289, _so_.

  Zold, ii. 287, _sold_.

  Zometimes, ii. 286, _sometimes_.

  Zon, ii. 290, _son_.

  Zorrow, ii. 289, _sorrow_.

  Zorts, ii. 286, _sorts_.

  Zubtil, ii. 290, _subtil_.

  Zuch, ii. 288, _such_.

  Zure, ii. 288, _sure_.

  Zweet, ii. 289, _sweet_.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




INDEX TO THE THREE VOLUMES.


    The Titles of the various Poems included in the _Reliques_ are
   distinguished from the other entries by being printed in italics.

  _A, Robyn, jolly Robyn_, I. 185-187.

  _Adam Bell, Clym of the Clough, and William of Cloudesley_, I. 153-179.

  _Admiral Hosier's Ghost_, II. 367-371.

  _Aged Lover renounceth Love_, by Lord Vaux, I. 179-182.

  _Agincourt, For the Victory of_, II. 29-31.

  _Alcanzor and Zayda_, translated by Percy, I. 338-342.

  _Aldingar_ (_Sir_), II. 54-67.
    ---- Version from the folio MS. II. 61-67.

  Alexandrine or Anapestic verse, II. 386.

  Alfred the Great as a Harper, I. 399.

  Alliterative metre without rhyme, II. 377-394.

  _Althea_ (_To_) _from Prison_, II. 321-323.

  _Ambree_ (_Mary_), II. 231-237.
    ---- Version from the folio MS. II. 235-237.

  "Amys and Amelion," III. 373.

  Anderson (John), the town crier of Kelso, II. 132.

  _Argentile and Curan_, II. 252-262.

  Arthour and Merlin, Romance of, III. 369.

  Arthur (King), Poems on, III. 3-43.
    ---- King Arthur and the King of Cornwall, III. 367.
    ---- _Legend of King Arthur_, III. 3-43.
    ---- _King Arthur's Death, a Fragment_, III. 27-35.
    ---- ---- Version from the folio MS. III. 35-39.
    ---- Le Morte Arthure, III. 366

  _As ye came from the Holy Land_, II. 101-103.
    ---- Copy from the folio MS. 104-105.

  _Auld_ (_The_) _Good-man_, III. 122-124.


  _Baffled Knight, or Lady's Policy_, II. 336-342.

  _Bailiff's Daughter of Islington_, III. 135-137.

  _Balet by the Earl of Rivers_, II. 48-49.

  _Ballad of Constant Susanna_, I. 209.

  _Ballad of Luther, the Pope, a Cardinal, and a Husbandman_, II. 125-130.

  Ballads and Ballad-Writers, I. xxiv.-xliv.
    ---- Imitators and Forgers of, I. xliv.-xlviii.
    ---- Authenticity of certain, I. xlviii.-lviii.
    ---- Preservers of the, I. lviii.-lxxii.
    ---- Collections of printed, I. lxiii.-lxv.
    ---- "Collection of old Ballads," I. lxix.
    ---- that illustrate Shakespeare, I. 151-246.
    ---- Ballad Literature since Percy, I. xci.-xcvii.
    ---- Meaning of the word ballad, I. xxx. 423.
    ---- Ballad-singers, I. xxxiii.-xxxiv.

  Balowe, II. 209-213.

  Bannatyne MS. I. lxii.

  _Barbara Allan, Sir John Grehme and_, III. 133-135.

  _Barbara Allen's Cruelty_, III. 128-130.

  Bards, successors of the ancient, I. 385.

  _Barton_ (_Sir Andrew_), II. 188-208.
    ---- Version from the folio MS. II. 201-208.

  _Battle of Otterbourne_, I. 35-54.

  Beaumont and Fletcher, _Farewell to Love_, I. 310.

  _Bedlam, Old Tom of_, II. 344-347.

  _Bednall Green, Beggar's Daughter of_, II. 171-185.

  Bedwell (William), II. 19.

  _Beggar's Daughter of Bednall Green_, II. 171-185.

  "Belesant (Lady), the Duke of Lombardy's fair Daughter," III. 373.

  "Bevis (Sir) of Hampton," referred to, III. 215, 265, 279, 357, 365.

  _Birth of St. George_, III. 215-224.

  Blondell de Nesle, the Minstrell, I. 359.

  Bodwell (Earle), II. 215-218.

  Bohemia, Elizabeth, Queen of, II. 312.

  Bolle (Sir John), II. 247.

  Bond-story in the "Merchant of Venice," I. 211.

  _Bonny Earl of Murray_, II. 226-228.

  Bosville's (Godfrey), explanation of the "Dragon of Wantley," III. 281.

  _Bothwell's (Lady Anne) Lament_, II. 209-213.

  _Boy and the Mantle_, III. 3-12.

  _Boy and the Mantle, as revised and altered by a modern hand_,
    III. 315-323.

  _Braes of Yarrow_, II. 362-367.

  Brandon's (Charles) livery and device, III. 167 (note).

  _Brave Lord Willoughbey_, II. 238-241.

  Breton (Nicholas), III. 67, 80.

  _Bride's Burial_, III. 148-152.

  _Bridges, Gascoigne's Praise of the Fair_, II. 150-154.

  Brown, Epithet applied to a sword, I. 122.

  Brown (Mrs.) of Falkland, I. lxvi.

  _Bryan and Pereene_, by J. Grainger, I. 328-331.


  Cadiz, Taking of, by the English, II. 243.

  Caliburn, King Arthur's Sword, III. 32.

  Carew (Thomas), _Unfading Beauty_, III. 239.

  Carey (Henry), _Distracted Lover_, II. 355-357.

  Carle of Carlisle, III. 367.

  "Carre (Captain)", from the folio MS. I. 148-150.

  _Cauline_ (_Sir_), I. 61-81.
    ---- Copy from the folio MS. I. 76-81.

  Chambers (Robert), "Romantic Scottish Ballads" noticed, I. l.

  _Character of a Happy Life_, by Sir H. Wotton, I. 317-318.

  _Charing-Cross, Downfall of_, II. 323-326.

  _Charles I., Verses by_, II. 329-326.

  _Chaucer, Original Ballad by_, II. 14-16.

  "Chevalere Assigne," an alliterative romance, II. 381; III. 369.

  Cheviot Hills, the scene of Chevy Chase, I. 254.

  _Chevy Chase, the Ancient Ballad of_, I. 19-35.
    ---- ---- Names mentioned in, I. 51-52.
    ---- _The more Modern Ballad of_, I. 249-264.
    ---- ---- Names mentioned in, I. 263-264.

  _Child of Elle_, I. 131-139.
    ---- Copy from the folio MS. I. 138-139.

  _Child Waters_, III. 58-65.

  _Children in the Wood_, III. 169-176.

  Chylde Ipomydon, a Romance, III. 371.

  Clym of the Clough, I. 153.

  Clyne (Norval) on the authenticity of _Sir Patrick Spence_, I. lii.

  _Complaint of Conscience_, II. 279-285.

  _Constant Penelope_, III. 261-264.

  _Cophetua_ (_King_) _and the Beggar-Maid_, I. 189-194.

  Coppe, an enthusiast, II. 349 (note).

  Corbet (Bishop Richard), _Fairies Farewell_, III. 207-213.
    ---- _The Distracted Puritan_, II. 347-351.

  _Corin's Fate_, II. 262-263.

  _Corydon's Doleful Knell_, II. 274-276.

  _Corydon's Farewell to Phillis_, I. 209-211.

  _Courtier, Old and Young_, II. 314-318.

  Crants, Ophelia's virgin, III. 152 (note).

  _Cromwell_ (_Thomas Lord_), II. 71-75.

  Cunningham's (Allan) forged Ballads, I. xlvi.

  _Cupid, Hue and Cry after_, III. 159-161.

  _Cupid and Campaspe, by John Lilye_, III. 85-86.

  _Cupid's Assault, by Lord Vaux_, II. 50-53.

  _Cupid's Pastime_, I. 314-317.

  Cymmortha in Wales, I. xix.


  Daniel (S.), _Ulysses and the Syren_, I. 311-314.

  Darnley, Ballad on his Murder, II. 213-218.

  _Dawson_ (_Jemmy_), II. 371-374.

  "Death and Life," an alliterative Poem, II. 383.

  Degree (Sir), a Romance, III. 371.

  Deloney (Thomas), Ballad-Writer, I. xxxviii.
    ---- _Sir Lancelot du Lake_, I. 204-209.
    ---- _The King of France's Daughter_, III. 161-168.
    ---- _The Winning of Cales_, II. 243-246.

  _Dido_ (_Queen_), III. 191-196.

  "Dioclesian, the Emperour," III. 373.

  _Distracted Lover_, II. 355-357.

  _Distracted Puritan_, II. 347-351.

  Douglas, Heraldic Arms of the House of, I. 47.

  _Downfall of Charing Cross_, II. 323-326.

  _Dowsabell_, by Michael Drayton, I. 304-310.

  _Dragon of Wantley_, III. 279-288.

  Drayton (Michael), _Dowsabell_, I. 304-310.

  _Dulcina_, III. 153-155.

  D'Urfey (Tom), _Frantic Lady_, II. 357-358.
    ---- _Lady distracted with Love_, II. 354-355.

  Dyer (Sir E.), _My Mind to Me a Kingdom is_, I. 294-298.

  _Dyttie to Hey Downe_, III. 44-45.


  _Edom o'Gordon_, I. 140-150.
    ---- Copy from the folio MS. I. 148-150.

  _Edward, Edward, a Scottish Ballad_, I. 82-84.

  _Edward I., on the Death of_, II. 10-14.

  _Edward IV. and Tanner of Tamworth_, II. 92-100.

  Edwards (Richard) _A Song to the Lute in Musicke_, I. 187-189.

  "Eger and Grime," III. 368.

  "Eglamour of Artas," a Romance, III. 370.

  _Eleanor's_ (_Queen_) _Confession_, II. 164-168.

  Elderton (William), Ballad-Writer, I. xxxvii.
    ---- his Ballad, _King of Scots and Andrew Browne_, II. 221-225.

  _Elizabeth_ (_Queen_), _Sonnet_ by, II. 218-220.

  _---- Verses while Prisoner at Woodstock_, II. 137-138.

  Emanuel College, Cambridge, II. 348 (note).

  Emarè, Romance of, III. 369.

  Erasmus, Colloquy on Pilgrimages, II. 86.

  _Estmere (King)_, I. 85-98.

  "Every Man," I. 433.

  _Ew-bughts, Marion, a Scottish Song_, III. 74-75.

  Excalibar, King Arthur's Sword, III. 32.


  _Fair Margaret and Sweet William_, III. 124-127.

  _Fair Rosamond_, II. 154-164.

  _Fairies Farewell_, III. 207-211.

  Fairy, Way to Get a, III. 210.

  _Fairy Queen_, III. 204-207.

  _Fancy and Desire, by the Earl of Oxford_, II. 185-187.

  _Farewell to Love_, I. 310.

  "Fit," meaning of a, I. xxiii.; II. 182.

  "Florence (Le bone) of Rome," III. 373.

  Folio MS. and the _Reliques_, I. lxxxi.-xci., 5-6.

  Four Elements, Interlude of the, I. 441.

  _France's_ (_King of_) _Daughter_, III. 161-168.

  _Frantic Lady_, II. 357, 358.

  _Friar of Orders Gray_, I. 242-246.

  _Frolicksome Duke, or the Tinker's good Fortune_, I. 238-242.

  Funeral Garlands, III. 152 (note).


  _Gaberlunyie Man_, II. 67-71.

  Garlands of Ballads, I. 423.

  Garlands (Funeral), III. 152 (note).

  _Gascoigne's Praise of the Fair Bridges_, II. 150-154.

  Gawain, the Duke and, III. 367.

  ---- and the Greene Knight, III. 367.

  ---- "Sir Gawan and Sir Galaron of Galloway," metrical Romance, III. 375.

  ---- "Gawan and Gologras," metrical Romance, III. 375.

  ---- _Marriage of Sir Gawayne_, III. 13-24.

  ---- ---- Ancient Fragment from the folio MS. 323-330.

  _Gentle Herdsman, tell to me_, II. 86-92.

  _Gentle River, Gentle River_, translated by Percy, I. 331-338.

  _George_ (_St._ ), _Birth of_, III. 215-224.

  _---- and the Dragon_, III. 224-232.

  _---- for England_, the first part, III. 288-293.

  ---- ---- the second part, by John Grubb, III. 293-308.

  _George Barnwell_, III. 240-252.

  _Gernutus the Jew of Venice_, I. 211-220.

  _Gil Morrice_, III. 91-100.

  ---- Version from the folio MS. 100-103.

  _Gilderoy_, I. 318-323.

  _Glasgerion_, III. 45-49.

  ---- the Harper, I. 396.

  Gleemen, I. 392.

  Glover (R.), _Admiral Hosier's Ghost_, II. 367-371.

  _Good-Man, The Auld_, III. 122-124.

  Graham (David) of Fintray, II. 229.

  Grainger (J.), _Bryan and Pereene_, I. 328-331.

  Gramarye, on the word, I. 96.

  "Green Knight," III. 367.

  Greenham (Richard), II. 350 (note).

  _Grehme_ (_Sir John_), _and Barbara Allan_, III. 133-135.

  Grubb (John), _St. George for England_, the second part, III. 293-308.

  Guy of Gisborne, I. 102.

  _Guy_ (_Sir_), _Legend of_, III. 107-113.

  ---- Romance of, III. 364.

  ---- Two Poems on Guy of Warwick, III. 364.

  _Guy and Amarant_, III. 114-121.

  Guy and Colbronde, Romance of, III. 364.


  Hamilton (W.), _The Braes of Yarrow_, II. 362-367.

  _Hardyknute, a Scottish Fragment_, II. 105-121.

  _Harpalus, an Ancient English Pastoral_, II. 75-79.

  Harpers and Minstrels, I. 390.

  Harrington, _Witch of Wokey_, I. 325-328.

  Hawes (Stephen) _Tower of Doctrine_, I. 127-130.

  Hawker (Rev. R. S.), Imitator of the Old Ballad, I. xlv.

  _Heir of Linne_, II. 138-150.

  ---- Version from the folio MS. II. 147-150.

  Henry II. and the Miller of Mansfield, III. 178-188.

  Henryson (Robert) _Robin and Makyne_, II. 79-86.

  _Hey Downe, Dyttie to_, III. 44-45.

  "Hick Scorner," I. 435.

  Hock Tuesday, Coventry Play of, I. 445.

  Holy-land, As Ye Came from the, II. 101-105.

  ---- Version from the folio MS. II. 104-105.

  Horne Childe, Romance of, III. 363.

  _Hosier's_ (_Admiral_) _Ghost_, II. 367-371.

  Howleglas, Merye Jest of, I. 431.

  _Hue and Cry after Cupid_, III. 159-161.

  Hugh of Lincoln, Story of, I. 54.

  Humbledon, Battle of, I. 35.


  Ipomydon, a Romance, III. 371.

  Ipotis, Poem of, III. 364.

  _Isabella's_ (_Lady_) _Tragedy_, III 155-158.

  Isenbras (Sir), Romance of, III. 369.

  Islington, III. 135.


  James V. _Gaberlunyie Man_, II. 67-71.

  James I. of England, _Verses by_, II. 300-302.

  _---- King of Scots and Andrew Browne_, II. 221-225.

  _Jane Shore_, II. 263-273.

  _Jealousy, Spanish Virgin, or Effects of_, III. 255-259.

  _Jealousy Tyrant of the Mind_, III. 260.

  _Jemmy Dawson_, II. 371-374.

  _Jephthah, Judge of Israel_, I. 182-185.

  _Jew's Daughter_, I. 54-60.

  Jews supposed to crucify Christian Children, I. 54.

  _John_ (_King_) _and the Abbot of Canterbury_, II. 303-312.

  ---- Version from the folio MS. II. 308-312.

  _John Anderson my Jo_, II. 131-133.

  "John the Reeve," referred to, II. 93, 179.

  Johnson (Richard), Ballad-Writer, I. xxxix.

  Jonson (Ben.) _A Hue and Cry after Cupid_, III. 159-161.

  _---- The Sweet Neglect_, III. 169.

  _---- The Witches' Song_, III. 196-199.


  King (Francis), the Skipton Minstrel, I. xxiii.

  _King and Miller of Mansfield_, III. 178-188.

  _King Arthur's Death_, III. 27-35.

  ---- Version from the folio MS. III. 35-39.

  _King Cophetua and the Beggar-Maid_, I. 189-194.

  _King Estmere_, I. 85-98.

  _King Leir and his Three Daughters_, I. 231-237.

  _King Ryence's Challenge_, III. 24-27.

  _King of France's Daughter_, III. 161-168.

  _King of Scots, Murder of the_, II. 213-218.

  _King of Scots and Andrew Browne_, II. 221-225.

  "King of Tars," III. 374.

  _Knight and Shepherd's Daughter_, III. 76-80.

  "Knight of Courtesy and the Lady of Faguel," III. 372.


  _Lady Distracted with Love_, II. 354, 355.

  _Lady turned Serving-Man_, III. 86-90.

  _Lady Anne Bothwell's Lament_, II. 209-213.

  _Lady Isabella's Tragedy_, III. 155-158.

  _Lady's Fall_, III. 139-145.

  Laing's (David) Opinion on the Authenticity of _Sir Patrick
    Spence_, I. xlix.

  Lambewell (Sir), Romance of, III. 368.

  _Lancelot (Sir) du Lake_, I. 204-209.

  Langland's Visions of Pierce Plowman, II. 377-394.

  Launfal (Sir), a Romance, III. 368.

  "Lay of Erie of Thoulouse," III. 372.

  _Legend of King Arthur_, III. 39-43.

  _Legend of Sir Guy_, III. 107-113.

  Legh (Sir Urias), II. 247.

  _Leir (King) and his Three Daughters_, I. 231-237.

  Levison (Sir Richard), II. 247.

  Libius Disconius, analysis of the Romance of, III. 358, 366.

  _Lilli Burlero_, II. 358-362.

  Lilly (John), _Cupid and Campaspe_, III. 85-86.

  _Little John Nobody_, II. 133-137.

  _Little Musgrave and Lady Barnard_, III. 68-74.

  _Lord Thomas and Fair Annet_, III. 234-238.

  _Lord Thomas and Fair Ellinor_, III. 82-85.

  _Love will find out a Way_, III. 232-234.

  Lovelace (Richard), _To Althea from Prison_, II. 321-323.

  ---- _To Lucasta on Going to the Wars_, III. 264-265.

  _Lover (A) of Late_, III. 177-178.

  _Loyalty Confined_, II. 326-329.

  _Lucasta (To) on Going to the Wars_, III. 264-265.

  _Lucy and Colin_, III. 312-315.

  _Lunatic Lover_, II. 351-353.

  _Luther, the Pope, a Cardinal, and a Husbandman, a Ballad of_,
    II. 125-130.

  Lusty Juventus, Interlude of, I. 442.

  _Lye (The), by Sir Walter Raleigh_, II. 297-300.


  Mad Songs--
     1.  Old Tom of Bedlam, II. 344-347.
     2.  The Distracted Puritan, II.  347-351.
     3.  The Lunatic Lover, II. 351-353.
     4.  The Lady Distracted with Love, II. 354-355.
     5.  The Distracted Lover, II.  355-357.
     6.  The Frantic Lady, II.  357-358.

  Mahound, on the word, I. 97.

  Maid Marian, III. 186.

  Maitland MS. I. lxii.

  Mallet (D.), _Margaret's Ghost_, III. 308-312.

  MS. (Folio) and the _Reliques_, I. lxxxi.-xci, 5-6.

  _Margaret_ (_Fair_) _and Sweet William_, III. 124-127.

  _Margaret's Ghost_, III. 308-312.

  Marlowe's (C.), _Passionate Shepherd to his Love_, I. 220-224.

  _Marriage of Sir Gawayne_, III. 13-24.

  ---- Ancient Fragment from the folio MS. III. 323-330.

  _Mary Ambree_, II. 231-237.

  ---- Version from folio MS. II. 235-237.

  "Merchant of Venice," Bond-Story in, I. 211.

  Merline, Romance of, III. 369.

  "Milky Way," Names of, II. 88.

  Miller of Mansfield, King and, III. 178-188.

  Minstrels, I. xiii.-xxiv.

  ---- Essay on the Ancient, in England, I. 343-381.

  ---- ---- Notes on, I. 382-430.

  Mirrour for Magistrates, I. 444.

  Montfort (Simon de), Earl of Leicester, II. 3.

  More of More-Hall, III. 283.

  _Morrice_ (_Gil_), III. 91-100.

  ---- Version from the folio MS. III. 100-103.

  Morte Arthure, III. 366.

  Munday (Anthony), Ballad-Writer, I. xxxix.

  _Murder of the King of Scots_, II. 213-218.

  _Murray, The Bonny Earl of_, II. 226-228.

  _Musgrave_ (_Little_) _and Lady Barnard_, III. 68-74.

  _My Mind to me a Kingdom is_, I. 294-298.


  "New (The) Custom," I. 444.

  _Northumberland_ (_Henry, 4th Earl of_), _Elegy on_, by Skelton,
    I. 117-126.

  Northumberland (Thomas, 7th Earl of), I. 266.

  _Northumberland betrayed by Douglas_, I. 279-288.

  ---- Version from the folio MS. I. 289-294.

  Northumberland (Elizabeth Duchess of), Dedications to, I. 1-3.

  Norton (Richard) and his Sons, I. 267, 270.

  _Not-Browne Mayd_, II. 31-47.


  _O Nancy wilt thou go with me_, I. lxxii.

  "Octavian Imperator," a Romance, III. 370.

  _Old and Young Courtier_, II. 314-318.

  _Old Robin of Portingale_, III. 50-54.

  ---- Version from the folio MS. III. 55-58.

  _Old Tom of Bedlam_, II. 344-347.

  _Otterbourne, The Battle of_, I. 35-54.

  "Otuel, a Knight," III. 374.

  "Owain Myles," III. 370.

  Oxford (Edward Vere, Earl of), _Fancy and Desire_, II. 185-187.


  Parker (Martin), Royalist Ballad-Writer, I. xl.

  _Passionate Shepherd to his Love_, I. 220-224.

  _Patient Countess_, I. 298-304.

  _Penelope, Constant_, III.  261-264.

  Pepperden, Battle of, I. 252.

  Percy (Bishop Thomas), Life of, I. lxxi.-lxxx.

  ---- Portraits of, I. lxxx.

  _---- Friar of Orders Gray_, I. 242-246.

  Perkins (William), II. 350 (note).

  _Phillida and Corydon_, III. 66-68.

  Pierce Plowman's Visions, alliterative Metre without Rhyme in,
    II. 377-394.

  Pipers (Town) of Scotland, I. xx.

  _Plain Truth and Blind Ignorance_, II. 285-290.

  Politick Maid, II. 337.

  Popham (Sir John), II. 247.

  Portugal, Voyage to, 1588, III. 176.

  Prior's Henry and Emma, II. 31.

  Pucke, alias Hobgoblin, III. 199.

  _Puritan, the Distracted_, II. 347-351.


  _Queen Dido_, III. 191-196.


  Rahere, the King's Minstrel, I. 406.

  Raleigh (Sir Walter), _The Lye_, II. 297-300.

  _---- The Nymph's Reply_, I. 233-224.

  "Reliques," first publication of the, I. lxxv., lxxxix.

  ---- Sources of the, I. lxxxi.-xci.

  Rembrun, Romance of, III. 365.

  "Richard Cure de Lyon, Historye of," III. 356, 372.

  _Richard of Almaigne_, II. 3-10.

  _Rising in the North_, I. 266-274.

  ---- Version from the folio MS. I. 274-278.

  Risp, or Tirling-pin, III. 47 (note).

  Ritson's Attack upon Percy, I. xiv.

  Rivers (Earl of), _Balet_, II. 45-49.

  "Robert, Kynge of Cysill," III. 373.

  _Robin_ (_Old_) _of Portingale_, III. 50-54.

  ---- Version from the folio MS. III. 55-58.

  _Robin and Makyne, an Ancient Scottish Pastoral_, II. 79-86.

  _Robin Good-Fellow_, III. 199-204.

  _Robin Hood and Guy of Gisborne_, I. 102-116.

  Robin Redbreast, popular belief relating to, III. 171-176.

  _Robyn_ (_A_), _jolly Robyn_, I. 185-187.

  Rolricht Stones, III. 302.

  Romances, on the Ancient Metrical, III. 339-376.

  Rondeau or Roundel, II. 14.

  _Rosamond_ (_Fair_), II. 154-164.

  Roxburghe Ballads, I. lxiii.

  _Ryence's_ (_King_) _Challenge_, III. 24-27.


  _Sale of Rebellious Household-Stuff_, II. 332-336.

  _Sandes (Lady)_, II. 150.

  Scott (Sir Walter) on the Controversy between Percy and Ritson, I. xiv.

  "Scottish Feilde," an alliterative Poem, II. 384.

  "Sege of Jerusalem," an alliterative Poem, II. 381; III. 369.

  Shakespeare, Ballads that illustrate, I. 151-246.

  _---- Take those Lips away_, I. 230.

  _---- Youth and Age_, I. 237-238.

  Sheale (Richard), the Preserver of _Chevy Chase_, I. xviii. 19.

  Shenstone (W.), _Jemmy Dawson_, II. 371-374.

  _Shepherd's Address to his Muse_, III. 80-81.

  _Shepherd's Resolution_, III. 188-191.

  Shirley (J.), _Death's Final Conquest_, I. 264-265.

  _---- Victorious Men of Earth_, II. 242.

  _Shore_ (_Jane_), II. 263-273.

  Sir, the title applied to Priests, I. 116.

  _Sir Aldingar_, II. 54-67.

  ---- Version from the folio MS. II. 61-67.

  _Sir Andrew Barton_, II. 188-208.

  ---- Version from the folio MS. II. 201-208.

  _Sir Cauline_, I. 61-81.

  ---- Copy from the folio MS. I. 76-81.

  Sir Degree, Degare or Degore, a Romance, III. 371.

  Sir Gawan and Sir Galaron of Galloway, metrical Romance, III. 375.

  Sir Isenbras, Romance of, III. 369.

  _Sir John Grehme and Barbara Allan_, III. 133-135.

  _Sir John Suckling's Campaigne_, II. 318-321.

  _Sir Lancelot du Lake_, I. 204-209.

  _Sir Patrick Spence_, I. 98-102.

  ---- Authenticity of, I. xlviii.

  Skeat (Rev. W. W.) on the Essay on Alliterative Metre, II. 394.

  Skelton's (John) _Elegy on Henry, fourth Earl of Northumberland_,
    I. 117-126.

  Soldan or Sowdan, on the words, I. 98.

  _Song to the Lute in Musicke_, I. 187-189.

  _Sonnet by Queen Elizabeth_, II. 218-220.

  Soules (The) Errand, II. 297-300.

  Spanish Ballads, I. 331.

  _Spanish Lady's Love_, II. 247-251.

  _Spanish Virgin, or Effects of Jealousy_, III. 255-259.

  Squyr of Lowe Degre, a Romance, III. 372.

  Stage, on the Origin of the English, I. 431-458.

  _Stedfast Shepherd_, III. 253-255.

  _Sturdy Rock_, II. 169-170.

  Suckling (Sir John), _Why so Pale_, II. 343-344.

  _---- Sir John Suckling's Campaigne_, II. 318-321.

  Surtees (Robert), Forger of Old Ballads, I.  xlvii.

  Susanna, Ballad of Constant, I. 209.

  _Sweet Neglect_, III. 169.

  _Sweet William, Fair Margaret and_, III. 124-127.

  _Sweet William's Ghost_, III. 130-133.

  Syr Triamore, a Romance, III. 371.


  Taillefer the Minstrel, I. xvi. 403.

  _Take those Lips away_, I. 230.

  _Take thy old Cloak about thee_, I. 195-198.

  "Taming of the Shrew," Story of the induction to, I. 238.

  Tearne-Wadling no longer a lake, III. 14 (note).

  Termagaunt, on the word, I. 96.

  _Thomas_ (_Lord_) _and Fair Annet_, III. 234-238.

  _Thomas_ (_Lord_) _and Fair Ellinor_, III. 82-85.

  Thoms (W. J.), Note on the _Reliques_, I. lxxxviii.

  Thorn (M.), _Sturdy Rock_, II. 169-170.

  "Thoulouse, Lay of Erle of," III. 372.

  Tickell (Thomas), _Lucy and Colin_, III. 312-315.

  Tirling Pin or Risp, III. 47 (note).

  _Titus Andronicus's Complaint_, I. 224-229.

  _Tom_ (_Old_) _of Bedlam_, II. 344-347.

  _Tottenham, Turnament of_, II. 17-28.

  _Tower of Doctrine_, by Stephen Hawes, I. 127-130.

  Triamore (Syr), a Romance, III. 371.

  Turke and Gawain, III. 367.

  _Turnament of Tottenham_, II. 17-28.

  Turnewathelan, III. 375.

  Tutbury Court of Minstrels, I. 368.


  _Ulysses and the Syren_, by S. Daniel, I. 311-314.

  _Unfading Beauty_, III. 239.


  _Valentine and Ursine_, III. 265-279.

  Vaux (Thomas, Lord), _Cupid's Assault_, II. 50-53.

  _---- The Aged Lover renounceth Love_, I. 179-182.

  _Verses by K. James I._, II. 300-302.

  _Verses by K. Charles I._, II. 329-332.

  _Victorious Men of Earth_, II. 242.


  Waits attached to Corporate Towns, I. xvi.

  Walsingham, Shrine of the Virgin at, II. 86, 101.

  _Wandering Jew_, II. 291-296.

  _Wantley, Dragon of_, III. 279-288.

  _Wanton Wife of Bath_, III. 333-338.

  _Waly Waly, Love be Bonny_, III. 145-148.

  Wardlaw (Lady), Imitator of the Old Ballad, I. xliv., xlix.

  _---- Hardyknute_, II. 105-121.

  Warner (W.), _Argentile and Curan_, II. 252-262.

  _---- The Patient Countess_, I. 298-304.

  _Waters_ (_Child_), III. 58-65.

  _Waters_ (_Young_), II. 228-231.

  Westmorland (Earl of), I. 266.

  Wharncliffe Lodge and Wood, III. 281.

  Wharton (Thomas, Marquis of), _Lilli Burlero_, II. 358-362.

  _Why so Pale_, by Sir John Suckling, II. 343-344.

  _Wife_ (_Wanton_) _of Bath_, III. 333-338.

  William (St.) of Norwich, I. 56.

  William of Cloudesley, I. 153.

  _William_ (_Sweet_), _Fair Margaret and_, III. 124-127.

  _William's_ (_Sweet_) _Ghost_, III. 130-133.

  William and Margaret, by D. Mallet, III. 308-312.

  _Willoughbey_ (_Brave Lord_), II. 238-241.

  _Willow, Willow, Willow_, I. 199-203.

  _Willow Tree, a Pastoral Dialogue_, III. 137-139.

  _Winifreda_, I. 323-325.

  _Winning of Cales_, II. 243-246.

  _Witch of Wokey_, by Dr. Harrington, I. 325-328.

  _Witches' Song_, III. 196-199.

  Wither (George), _Shepherd's Resolution_, III. 188-191.

  _---- The Stedfast Shepherd_, III. 253-255.

  Wokey-hole in Somersetshire, I. 325.

  Wortley (Sir Thomas), III. 282.

  Wotton (Sir H.), _Character of a Happy Life_, I. 317-318.

  _---- You Meaner Beauties_, II. 312-314.


  _Yarrow, The Braes of_, II. 362-367.

  _You Meaner Beauties_, II. 312-314.

  _Young Waters_, II. 228-231.

  _Youth and Age_, I. 237-238.

  Ypotis, Poem of, III. 364.




  Transcriber's Notes:


  Simple spelling, grammar, and typographical errors
  were corrected.

  Punctuation normalized.

  Anachronistic and non-standard spellings retained as printed.

  ERRATA on p. vii were incorporated in the document.

  Italics markup is enclosed in _underscores_.

  Greek text is transliterated and enclosed in #number signs#.

  Anglo-Saxon uncial script is enclosed in +plus signs+.

                    Special Characters and Symbols.

  Latin Abbreviation Large Sign Et                                  [et]
  Latin small letter heng                                           [hj]
  Latin small letter thorn with stroke                              [þ/]
  yogh                                                              [gh]
  inverted asterism                                                [***]
  triple dagger (center one reversed)                              [+±+]
  therefore sign                                                   [···]
  reversed pilcrow sign                                             [r¶]
  black right pointing index                                        [-»]
  white right pointing index                                        [->]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Reliques of Ancient English Poetry,
Volume III (of 3), by Thomas Percy

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RELIQUES OF ENGLISH POETRY, VOL III ***

***** This file should be named 45941-8.txt or 45941-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/5/9/4/45941/

Produced by Richard Tonsing, Jonathan Ingram and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Cyclopaedia of Canadian Biography: Being
Chiefly Men of the Time, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: A Cyclopaedia of Canadian Biography: Being Chiefly Men of the Time

Author: Various

Editor: George Maclean Rose

Release Date: August 18, 2018 [EBook #57724]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CYCLOPAEDIA OF CANADIAN BIOGRAPHY ***




Produced by Mardi Desjardins & the online Distributed
Proofreaders Canada team at http://www.pgdpcanada.net





               _ROSE’S NATIONAL BIOGRAPHICAL SERIES. II._


                              A CYCLOPÆDIA

                                   OF

                          CANADIAN BIOGRAPHY:

                                 BEING

                        CHIEFLY MEN OF THE TIME.


       A COLLECTION OF PERSONS DISTINGUISHED IN PROFESSIONAL AND
          POLITICAL LIFE; LEADERS IN THE COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY
                  OF CANADA, AND SUCCESSFUL PIONEERS.


                              _EDITED BY_
                           GEO. MACLEAN ROSE.

                             [Illustration]



                            T o r o n t o :
            R O S E   P U B L I S H I N G   C O M P A N Y .
                                 1888.




             Entered according to the Act of Parliament of
             Canada, in the year one thousand eight
             hundred and eighty-eight, by HUNTER, ROSE
             & CO., at the department of Agriculture.

                          PRINTED AND BOUND BY
                          HUNTER, ROSE & CO.,
                                TORONTO.




                                PREFACE.


It has been too long a custom to regard as proper subjects for
biographical literature only persons who have figured in political life.
In preparing the present work, any man or woman who has, in any
conspicuous way, contributed to the moral, intellectual, industrial or
political growth of the country, has been deemed a suitable person for
these pages. To the heroism and uncomplaining industry of the men who
hewed out homes in the wilderness, and little by little overcame the
obstacles of nature, are we indebted now for our thriving cities, and
for our wide stretches of cultivated lands; and to omit a record of
their labors, and select only for permanent record the deeds of those
who came upon the scenes when the rugged work was done, would be
singularly unjust. We have had, and still have amongst us, men of great
genius in engineering skill, and in mechanical contrivance; and it was
fitting that a brief record of their lives, and what they accomplished
for the community, should be handed down in the history of our common
country. The same may be said of men prominent in every branch of
commerce, of our notable divines, our eminent judges, our great lawyers,
our talented medical men, and those who have contributed to the
educational growth of the country. These it was considered were worthy
of place side by side with the men who chose political careers, and have
won more or less distinction therein. There is to be said in
justification of all these records, that even the history of the man in
an obscure village is a portion of the history of the country, and the
aggregate record of “Representative Canadians” may be regarded in a
young country like Canada, as a full historical account, in every sense,
for the period covered by the biographical matter in the volume. Men are
forever drifting down the slow stream, and most of their deeds like
themselves, pass into oblivion; it is well while the opportunity is at
hand to save as much of the record as possible for posterity. The labor,
the time, and the pains spent in securing data for the sketches herein
contained have been greater than would be believed; and the more so
since accuracy of statement of fact, and the chronological order of
incidents, have been so rigidly aimed at. Dates and facts have all been
verified either by reference to the best published authorities, or to
the persons themselves. For the most part, the call for the coöperation
of the public in furnishing data for the records has been cordially
responded to. As for the literary portion of the work, no pains have
been spared to make that equal to the other features. To make the volume
complete in the historically “representative” sense, memoirs of the most
illustrious of the dead of this country will be found in its pages. The
enterprise has been tedious, laborious and expensive; but if it will
supply a record that the country should not let die; if it preserves the
names of worthy men and women whose deeds deserve to be remembered, it
surely will have well repaid the time, the anxiety, and the pains that
have been expended upon it. A work of this kind could not be else than
tedious; and, therefore, since its commencement, several changes have
taken place: some of the persons in its pages have died; others have
passed from one office to another, and dropped from public places; but
with these latter exceptions and some other minor ones, each memoir, it
is believed, will be found to be an accurate record up to the present
date.

                                                   GEO. MACLEAN ROSE.
  TORONTO, March, 1888.




       Transcriber’s Notes can be found at the end of this eBook.




                                 INDEX.


                                                               PAGE.
     Addenda                                                     815

                                   =A=

     Adam, G. M., Toronto,                                       759
     Adam, L. A. S., Sheriff, St. Hyacinthe,                     490
     Adams, Aaron A., Coaticook,                                 376
     Adams, Hon. Michael, Newcastle,                             230
     Adams, Rev. Thomas, M.A., D.C.L., Lennoxville,              403
     Aikins, Hon. James Cox, P.C., Lieut.-Governor,              609
       Winnipeg,
     Aikins, William T., M.D., LL.D., Toronto,                   797
     Alexander, Rev. Finlow, M.R.C.S., L.S.A.,                   300
       Fredericton,
     Allan, Hon. G. W., D.C.L., Toronto,                         781
     Allard, Joseph Victor, Berthierville,                       483
     Allen, Hon. John C., Fredericton,                           261
     Allison, Charles F., Sackville,                              50
     Allison, Charles, Yarmouth,                                 312
     Allison, David, M.A., LL.D., Halifax,                       719
     Allnatt, Rev. F. J. B., D.D., Lennoxville,                  497
     Alward, S., A.M., D.C.L., M.P.P., St. John,                 101
     Amherst, Lord Jeffery,                                      513
     Anderson, Alexander, Charlottetown,                          54
     Anderson, Captain Edward Brown, Sarnia,                     179
     Angers, Hon. Auguste Réal, Quebec,                     242, 815
     Angus, Richard Bladworth, Montreal,                         465
     Antliff, Rev. J. C., M.A., D.D., Montreal,                  251
     Archambault, Urgel-Eugène, Montreal,                         36
     Archibald, Abram Newcomb,                                   211
     Archibald, Hon. Sir Adams Geo., K.C.M.G., D.C.L.,           164
       P.C., Q.C., Halifax,
     Archibald, Peter S., Moncton,                               257
     Archibald, John S., Q.C., D.C.L., Montreal,                 526
     Armour, Hon. John Douglas, Judge, Cobourg,                  654
     Armstrong, Hon. James, Q.C., C.M.G., Sorel,                 325
     Armstrong, Rev. W. D., M.A., Ph.D., Ottawa,                  49
     Aubrey, Rev, François Fortunat, St. John’s,                 586

                                   =B=

     Baby, Hon. L. F. G., Judge, Montreal,                       192
     Badgley, Rev. E. I., M.A., B.D., LLD., Cobourg,             366
     Baillairgé, Chev. C. P. F., M.S., Quebec,                   166
     Baillairgé, Louis de G., Q.C., Quebec,                 252, 815
     Bain, James William, M.P., St. Polycarpe,                   603
     Ball, George, Nicolet,                                      769
     Baptist, George, Three Rivers,                              771
     Barbeau, Henri Jacques, Montreal,                           427
     Barclay, Rev. James, M.A., Montreal,                        124
     Barclay, Rev. John, D.D., Toronto,                          320
     Barker, Frederic Eustace, M.A., D.C.L., Q.C., M.P.,         207
       St. John,
     Barnard, Edmund, Montreal,                                  710
     Barrett, M., B.A., M.D., Toronto,                           160
     Barry, Denis, B.C.L., Montreal,                             723
     Baudouin, Philibert, St. John’s,                            582
     Baxter, Robert Gordon, M.D., Moncton,                       103
     Bayard, William, M.D., St. John,                             23
     Bayly, Richard, B.A., Q.C., London,                          38
     Baynes, William Craig, B.A.,                                371
     Beaton, Alexander H., M.D., Orillia,                        187
     Beaubien, Hon. Louis, Montreal,                             631
     Beckwith, A. G., C.E., Fredericton,                          86
     Beckwith, Hon. John Adolphus,                                88
     Beek, James Scott, Fredericton,                             218
     Begg, Alexander, Dunbow Ranch, N.W.T.,                      350
     Bégin, Rev. Louis Nazaire, D.D., Quebec,                    177
     Belanger, Louis-Charles, Sherbrooke,                        673
     Bélanger, Rev. François Honoré, Quebec,                     274
     Bell, Andrew Wilson, Carleton Place,                        109
     Bell, J. H., M.A., M.P.P., Summerside,                      269
     Belleau, Sir Narcisse, K.C.M.G., Q.C., Quebec,              347
     Benson, Rev. Manly, Toronto,                                 59
     Bentley, Hon. G. W. W., Kensington,                         259
     Bergeron, J. G. H., B.C.L., M.P., Montreal,                 438
     Bernier, Michael Esdras, M.P., St. Hyacinthe,               595
     Berryman, Daniel Edgar, M.D., C.M., A.R.S., St.             268
       John,
     Berryman, John, M.D., M.P.P., St. John,                     674
     Berthelot, Hon. J. A., Judge, Montreal,                      43
     Bethune, J. L., M.D.C.M., M.P.P., Baddeck,                  285
     Bethune, R. H., Toronto,                                    764
     Bingay, Thomas Van Buskirk, Yarmouth,                  550, 815
     Binney, Irwine Whitty, Moncton,                              42
     Binney, Right Rev. Hibbert, D.D.,                           699
     Blackadar, Hugh William, Halifax,                           706
     Black, Charles Allan, M.D., Amherst,                        474
     Black, J. Burpee, M.D., Windsor, N.S.,                      549
     Black, Thomas R., M.P.P., Amherst,                          733
     Black, William Tell, Windsor,                               808
     Blair, Frank I., M.D., St. Stephen,                         352
     Blair, Hon. A. G., Fredericton,                             440
     Blake, Hon. E., P.C., Q.C., M.P., Toronto,                  690
     Blanchet, Hon. Jean, Q.C., M.P.P., Quebec,                  431
     Blanchet, Hon. Joseph Goderic, Quebec,                      107
     Boak, Hon. Robert, Halifax,                                 682
     Boire, Louis Henri Napoleon, Three Rivers,                  430
     Boivin, Charles Alphonse, St. Hyacinthe,                    646
     Borden, F. W., B.A., M.D., M.P., Canning,                   317
     Boswell, G. M. J., Judge, Cobourg,                          131
     Botsford, Hon. Bliss, Moncton,                              603
     Boulton, Lieut.-Col. D’Arcy E., Cobourg,                    769
     Bourgeois, G. A., M.D., C.M., Three Rivers,                 766
     Bourgeois, Hon. Jean Baptiste, Three Rivers,                646
     Bourinot, John George, LL.D., Ottawa,                       326
     Bowell, Hon. Mackenzie, M.P., Belleville,                   701
     Bowser, Rev. Alex. Thomas, B.D., Toronto,                   473
     Branchaud, Moise, Q.C., Beauharnois,                        104
     Bresse, Hon. Guillaume, Quebec,                             583
     Bridges, Henry Seabury, Fredericton,                        749
     Brock, Major-General Sir Isaac, K.B.,                       113
     Brock, Rev. Isaac, M.A., D.D., Halifax,                     480
     Brodie, Robert, Quebec,                                     374
     Bronson, Erskine Henry, M.P.P., Ottawa,                     153
     Brooks, Hon. E. T., Judge, Sherbrooke,                      766
     Brown, H. B., Q.C., LL.M., Sherbrooke,                      499
     Brown, William,                                             577
     Bruce, Rev. George, B.A., St. John,                         202
     Brymner, Douglas, Ottawa,                                   806
     Bryson, Hon. George, Senr., Fort Coulonge,                  470
     Buchanan, Wentworth James, Montreal,                        744
     Buller, Frank, M.D., Montreal,                              172
     Bullock, Joseph, St. John,                                   41
     Burland, George B., Montreal,                               441
     Burns, Rev. Robert Ferrier, D.D., Halifax,              40, 815
     Burrill, James, Yarmouth,                                   716
     Burrill, William, Yarmouth,                                 720
     Burwash, Rev. Nathaniel, S.T.D., Cobourg,                    90

                                   =C=

     Cabana, Hubert Charon, Sherbrooke,                          602
     Cadman, James, C.E., Quebec,                                565
     Cairns, George Frederick, Smith’s Falls,                     57
     Cairns, Thomas, Perth,                                       57
     Call, Robert Randolph, Newcastle,                           121
     Cameron, Allan, M.D., Collingwood,                          807
     Cameron, Charles, Collingwood,                              333
     Cameron, Sir Matthew, Toronto,                              156
     Cameron, Wm., M.P.P., Sutherland River, Pictou,             333
     Campbell, F. W., M.A., M.D., L.R.C.P., Montreal,            321
     Campbell, George W., A.M., M.D., LL.D.,                     205
     Campbell, Hon. Wm., Park Corner,                            473
     Campbell, Rev. Kenneth A., Orillia,                         202
     Campbell, Rev. R., M.A., D.D., Montreal,                    132
     Campbell, Sir Alexander, K.C.M.G., Lieut.-Governor,         531
       Toronto,
     Cannon, Lawrence Ambrose, Quebec,                           400
     Carbray, Felix, Quebec,                                     499
     Cardin, Louis Pierre Paul, M.P.P., Sorel,                   688
     Cargill, Henry, M.P., Cargill,                              272
     Carignan, Onesime, Three Rivers,                            525
     “Caris Sima” (Clara H. Mountcastle), Clinton,               292
     Carleton, John Louis, St. John,                             100
     Carling, Hon. John, London,                                 680
     Caron, Hon. Sir Jos. Philippe Rene Adolphe,                 663
       K.C.M.G., B.C.L., Ottawa,
     Carrier, Charles William, Levis,                            421
     Carson, Rev. W. Wellington, Ottawa,                         556
     Carswell, James, Renfrew,                                   478
     Cartier, Jacques,                                            17
     Cartier, Sir George Etienne,                                569
     Casavant, Joseph Claver, St. Hyacinthe,                     590
     Casavant, Samuel, St. Hyacinthe,                            590
     Casgrain, T. C., Q.C., LL.D., M.P.P., Quebec,               278
     Castle, Rev. J. H., D.D., Toronto,                          768
     Chabot, Julien, Quebec,                                381, 815
     Chagnon, Hon. H. W., Judge, St. John’s,                     633
     Chamberlain, David Cleveland, Pembroke,                     242
     Champlain, Samuel de,                                       612
     Chapleau, Hon. J. A., Q.C., LL.D., M.P., Montreal,          634
     Chapman, Robert Andrew, Dorchester,                         263
     Charland, Hon. Justice Alfred N., B.C.L., St.               721
       John’s,
     Charlebois, Alphonse, Quebec,                               607
     Chauveau, Hon. Justice Alexander, B.C.L., Quebec,           213
     Chênevert, Cuthbert Alphonse, Berthierville,                751
     Chesley, John Alexander, Portland,                          138
     Chicoyne, Jerome Adolphe, Sherbrooke,                       369
     Child, Marcus, Coaticook,                                   647
     Chisholm, Mrs. Addie, Ottawa,                               604
     Chisholm, Peter J., Truro,                                  408
     Choquette, P. A., LL.B., M.P., Montmagny,                   341
     Church, Hon. Charles Edward, Halifax,                       171
     Cimon, Hon. M. H. E., Judge, Fraserville,                   377
     Clarke, Edw. Frederick, M.P.P., Toronto,                    525
     Clarke, Henry Edward, M.P.P., Toronto,                      746
     Clark, Rev. W. B., Quebec,                                  279
     Clemo, Ebenezer,                                            349
     Clinch, Robert Thomson, St. John,                           581
     Cloran, Henry Joseph, B.C.L., Montreal,                     342
     Cluxton, Wm., Peterboro’,                                    63
     Coburn, George H., M.D., Fredericton,                       206
     Cockburn, G. R. R., M.P., Toronto,                          600
     Coldwell, Albert Edward, M.A., Wolfville,                   506
     Coleman, Arthur Philemon, Ph.D., Cobourg,                   196
     Colfer, Lieut.-Col. George William, Quebec,                 448
     Cook, Rev. John, D.D., LL.D., Quebec,                       578
     Cooke, Richard S., Three Rivers,                            767
     Cooke, Right Rev. Thomas, Bishop,                           779
     Cooke, Thos. Vincent, Moncton,                              127
     Cooley, Rev. John W., Hamilton,                             740
     Corning, Thomas Edgar, Yarmouth,                            549
     Costigan, Hon. John, Ottawa,                                709
     Coté, Louis, St. Hyacinthe,                                 588
     Coursol, Capt. C. J. Q., St. John’s,                        563
     Courtney, Right Rev. Bishop Frederick,                      586
     Cowperthwaite, Rev. H. P., A.M., St. John,                  260
     Craig, James, B.A., Renfrew,                                 55
     Cram, John Fairbairn, Carleton Place,                       117
     Creed, Herbert Clifford, Fredericton,                       106
     Creelman, Hon. Samuel, M.L.C., Round Bank, Upper            306
       Stewiacke,
     Crinion, Rev. James Eugene, Dunnville,                      248
     Crisp, Rev. Robert S., Moncton,                             125
     Crocket, William, A.M., Fredericton,                        123
     Cross, Hon. Alexander, Judge, Montreal,                     165
     Currey, Lemuel Allan, M.A., St. John,                        89
     Currie, John Z., A.B., M.D., Fredericton,                    90
     Curry, Matthew Allison, M.D., Halifax,                      627
     Cuthbert, Edward O. J. A., Berthierville,                   191

                                   =D=

     Daly, Thomas Mayne, M.P., Brandon,                          316
     David, Laurent Oliver, M.P.P., Montreal,                    290
     Davidson, Hon. Justice C. P., Montreal,                     562
     Davie, George Taylor, Levis,                                728
     Davis, D. W., M.P., Macleod,                                783
     Dawson, Sir J. William, Knight, C.M.G., LL.D.,              598
       F.R.S., Montreal,
     de Cazes, Paul, Quebec,                                     378
     de La Bruère, Hon. P. B., St. Hyacinthe,                    424
     de Lottinville, J. B. S. L., Three Rivers,                  809
     de Martigny, Adelard Le Moyne, Montreal,                    147
     Denoncourt, N. L., Q.C., Three Rivers,                      541
     Derbishire, Stewart,                                        487
     Desaulniers, D. B. W., M.D., Nicolet,                       561
     Desaulniers, F. S. L., B.C.L., M.P., Yamachiche,            348
     DesBrisay, Theophilus, Q.C., Bathurst,                      181
     Deschenes, G. H., M.P.P., St. Epiphane,                     774
     Desilets, Joseph Moise, Q.C., Three Rivers,                 746
     Desjardins, Dr. Louis Edouard, Montreal,                    115
     Desjardins, Lieut.-Col. L. G., M.P.P., Levis,               472
     De Sola, Abraham, LL.D.,                                     97
     Dessaint, Major A., LL.B., Kamouraska,                      773
     Dessaulles, George Casimir, St. Hyacinthe,                  483
     De Wolfe, C. E., Judge, Windsor, N.S.,                      397
     Dickson, George, M.A., Toronto,                             760
     Dickson, William Welland, M.D., Pembroke,                   116
     Dionne, N. E., S.B., M.D., Quebec,                          256
     Dobell, Richard Reid, Quebec,                               421
     Dobson, Rev. William, Fredericton,                          335
     Doney, Charles, Ottawa,                                     328
     Dorion, Hon. Sir A. A., Knight, Montreal,                   641
     d’Orsonnens, Lieut.-Col. the Count Louis Gustave            596
       d’Odet,
     Doucet, Laman R., Sheriff, Bathurst,                        405
     Doutre, Joseph, Q.C., Montreal,                             305
     Dowdall, James, Almonte,                                    122
     Drolet, Jacques François Gaspard, Quebec,                   364
     Drummond, A. T., B.A., LL.B., Montreal,                     311
     Drysdale, William, Montreal,                                794
     Duchesnay, Lieut.-Col. H. J. J.,                            775
     Duclos, Silas T., St. Hyacinthe,                            775
     Duhamel, Most Rev. J. T., Archbp., Ottawa,                  683
     Dunbar, James, Q.C., Quebec,                                724
     Duncan, John, St. John,                                     496
     Dunn, Timothy Hibbard, Quebec,                              542
     Dunnet, Thomas, Toronto,                                    304
     Duplessis, L. T. N. Le N., Three Rivers,                    745
     Dupré, Rev. L. L., Sorel,                                   608
     Dymond, A. H., Brantford,                                   809

                                   =E=

     Earle, Sylvester Zobieski, M.D., St. John,                  229
     Edgar, James David, M.P., Toronto,                          594
     Edgar, William, Montreal,                              664, 815
     Edwards, William Cameron, Rockland,                         345
     Elliott, Andrew, Almonte,                                    92
     Elliott, Edward, Perth,                                     370
     Elliott, George, Guelph,                                    629
     Ellis, James, Toronto,                                      813
     Ellis, William, St. Catharines,                             121
     Ellis, Wm. Hodgson, B.A., M.B., L.R.C.P., Toronto,          662
     Emmerson, H. R., LL.B., Dorchester,                         500
     Emmerson, Rev. Robert Henry,                                498
     Evanturel, Francis Eugene Alfred, LL.B., M.P.P., St.        323
       Victor d’Alfred,

                                   =F=

     Fabre, Most Rev. E. C., Archbp., Montreal,                  446
     Falconbridge, Hon. William Glenholme, M.A., Toronto,    64, 815
     Farrell, E., M.D., Halifax,                                 777
     Fenwick, G. E., M.D., C.M., Montreal,                       402
     Ferguson, Hon. D., M.P.P., Charlottetown,                   135
     Fielding, Hon. W. S., M.P.P., Halifax,                      297
     Finnie, J. T., M.D., L.R.C.S., Montreal,                    101
     Fiske, Edward, Joliette,                                    723
     Fitch, Edson, Quebec,                                       365
     Fitzgerald, Rev. D., D.D., Charlottetown,                   112
     Fitzpatrick, Charles, Quebec,                               494
     Fizét, L. J. C., Lieut.-Colonel, Quebec,                    275
     Fogo, Hon. James, Judge, Pictou,                            184
     Foster, Hon. G. E., B.A., D.L.C., Ottawa,                   752
     Foster, James Gilbert, Q.C., Halifax,                       206
     Fothergill, Rev. M. Monkhouse, Quebec,                      185
     Flewelling, William Pentreath, Fredericton,                  67
     Flint, T. B., M.A., LL.B., Yarmouth,                        264
     Flynn, Hon. E. J., Q.C., LL.D., M.P.P., Quebec,             244
     Fournier, Hon. Telesphore, Judge, Ottawa,                   481
     Fowler, Rev. Robert, London,                                161
     Fraser, Hon. D. C., B.A., New Glasgow,                      458
     Fraser, Hon. J. J., Judge, Fredericton,                     183
     Fraser, John A., M.P.P., Big Bras d’Or,                     750
     Freer, Lieut. Harry Courtlandt, St. John’s,                 567
     Fry, Edward Carey, Quebec,                                  508
     Fulford, Right Rev. Francis, D.D., Bishop,                  425
     Fullerton, James S., Toronto,                               350
     Fulton, Dr. John, Toronto,                                  697
     Futvoye, I. B., St. John’s,                                 782

                                   =G=

     Gagnon, Hon. C. A. E., M.P.P., Kamouraska,                  529
     Galbraith, Rev. W., B.C.L., LL.B., Orillia,                  55
     Garneau, Hon. Pierre, Quebec,                               187
     Gauvreau, Rev. Antoine, Levis,                              451
     Gaynor, John Joseph, M.D., St. John,                        145
     Gendreau, Jean Baptiste, N.P., Coaticooke,                  391
     Genest, L. U. A., Three Rivers,                             405
     Germain, Adolphe, Sorel,                                    606
     Gervais, Marie Emery, M.D., Three Rivers,                   444
     Gibbons, Robert, Sheriff, Goderich,                         798
     Gibsone, W. C., Quebec,                                     776
     Gilmour, John Taylor, M.D., M.P.P., West Toronto            175
       Junction,
     Gilmour, Lieut.-Col. H., Stanbridge East,                   774
     Gilpin, Edwin, Jr., Halifax,                                177
     Gilpin, Rev. Edwin, D.D., Halifax,                          169
     Gingras, Hon. Jean Elie, Quebec,                            660
     Girard, Abbé Pierre, M.A., Sherbrooke,                      496
     Girouard, Désiré, Q.C., D.C.L., M.P., Dorval,               226
     Girouard, Theophile, Quebec,                                558
     Glackmeyer, Charles, Montreal,                              176
     Gouin, Antoine Nemese, Sorel,                               581
     Gould, George, Walkerton,                                   792
     Grant, Henry Hugh, Halifax,                                 678
     Grant, Rev. George Monro, D.D., Kingston,                   388
     Grant, Rev. R. N., Orillia,                                 212
     Gravel, Rev. J. A., St. Hyacinthe,                          750
     Graveley, Lieut.-Col. John Vance, Cobourg,                  216
     Gray, James, Perth,                                          93
     Green, Harry Compton, Summerside,                           184
     Greenwood, Stansfield, Coaticook,                           679
     Griffin, Martin J., Ottawa,                                 436
     Guest, Sheriff G. H., Yarmouth,                             566
     Guevrement, Hon. J. B., Sorel,                              780
     Guilbault, Edouard, Joliette,                               597
     Guillet, Major George, M.P., Cobourg,                       409
     Guthrie, Donald, Q.C., M.P.P., Guelph,                       49
     Guy, Michel Patrice, N.P., Montreal,                        726

                                   =H=

     Haanel, E. E., F.R.S.C., Ph.D., Cobourg,                    526
     Hale, Frederick Harding, M.P., Woodstock,                   363
     Hale, Hon. Edward,                                          518
     Hale, Hon. John,                                            552
     Haliburton, Hon. Thomas Chandler,                           443
     Hall, Francis Alexander, Perth,                              82
     Hall, John Smythe, Jr., B.A., B.C.L., Q.C., M.P.P.,         357
       Montreal,
     Hall, Robert Newton, B.A., LL.D., Q.C., M.P.,               685
       Sherbrooke,
     Hamilton, Hon. C. E., Q.C., Winnipeg,                       472
     Hamilton, Robert, D.C.L., Lennoxville,                      742
     Hammond, John, St. John,                                    521
     Hanington, Hon. Daniel L., Q.C., M.P.P., Dorchester,        245
     Harper, J. M., M.A., Ph.D., F.E.I.S., Quebec,               231
     Harris, Christopher Prince, Moncton,                         86
     Harris, John Leonard, Moncton,                              354
     Harris, Joseph A., Moncton,                            126, 815
     Harris, Michael Spurr, Moncton,                             108
     Harris, Very Rev. W. R., B.D., St. Catharines,              224
     Harrison, Hon. Archibald, Maugerville,                      175
     Harrison, Thomas, LL.D., Fredericton,                       107
     Hart, John Semple, Perth,                                   621
     Hatt, Samuel Staunton, Quebec,                              286
     Haythorne, Hon. Robert Poore, Charlottetown,                657
     Hearn, David A., M.P.P., Arichat,                           225
     Heavysege, Charles,                                          32
     Hemming, E. J., D.C.L., Drummondville,                       71
     Henderson, D., M.P., Acton,                                 777
     Hensley, Hon. J., Judge, Charlottetown,                     427
     Hetherington, George A., M.D., L.M., St. John,         298, 815
     Hewson, C. W. U., M.D., L.R.C.P., L.M., Amherst,            312
     Hill, Andrew Gregory, P.M., Niagara Falls,                   53
     Hill, Hon. G. F., St. Stephen,                              763
     Hincks, Sir Francis,                                        812
     Hind, Professor H. Y., M.A., Windsor, N.S.,                 308
     Hingston, William Hales, M.D., L.R.C.S., D.C.L.,            436
       Montreal,
     Hinson, Rev. Walter, Moncton,                                50
     Hodder, Edward M., M.D.,                                    647
     Holmes, Hon. Simon H., Halifax,                             163
     Honan, Martin, Three Rivers,                                773
     Honey, John S., Montreal,                                   772
     Hopper, Rev. J. E., M.A., D.D., St. John,                   336
     Hossack, William, Quebec,                                   330
     Hould, J. B. L., LL.B., Three Rivers,                       625
     Howard, R. P., M.D., L.R.C.S.E., Montreal,                  511
     Howe, Henry Aspinwall, T.C.D., M.A., LL.D.,                 565
       Montreal,
     Howe, Hon. Joseph,                                          587
     Hudspeth, Adam, Q.C., M.P., Lindsay,                        463
     Huggan, W. T., Charlottetown,                               805
     Humphrey, John Albert, M.P.P., Moncton,                     186
     Hunt, Henry George, St. Catharines,                         126
     Hunter, Rev. Samuel J., D.D., Hamilton,                      66
     Hunton, Sidney Walker, M.A., Sackville,                     197

                                   =I=

     Inch, James R., M.A., L.L.D., Sackville,                    322
     Inches, P. R., M.D., M.R.C.S., St. John,                    133
     Inglis, George, Owen Sound,                                 643
     Ingram, Andrew B., M.P.P., St. Thomas,                      301
     Irvine, Hon. George, Q.C., D.C.L., Quebec,                  564
     Irvine, Matthew Bell, C.B., C.M.G., Com.-General,           337
       Quebec,
     Irving, Andrew, Pembroke,                                   352
     Irving, J. D., Brigade Major, Charlottetown,                105
     Ives, Herbert Root, Montreal,                               629

                                   =J=

     Jack, William Brydone, M.A., D.C.L.,                        260
     Jaffray, Robert, Toronto,                                   675
     Jamieson, Philip, Toronto,                                  676
     Jarvis, Frederick William,                                  171
     Jennings, Rev. John, D.D.,                                  462
     Jetté, Hon. L. A., LL.D., Judge, Montreal,                  432
     Johnson, Hon. F. G., Montreal,                              114
     Johnston, C. H. L., M.D., L.R.C.S., St. John,               234
     Johnston, Hon. J. W., Judge, Dartmouth,                     266
     Jolicœur, Phillippe Jacques, Q.C., Quebec,                  602
     Joliffe, Rev. William John, B.C.L., Quebec,                 324
     Joncas, Louis Zephrim, M.P., Grand River,                   355
     Jones, Hon. A. G., P.C., M.P., Halifax,                     385
     Jones, Sir David,                                           345
     Jones, R. V., A.M., Ph.D., Wolfville,                       466
     Jones, Rev. Septimus, M.A., Toronto,                        637
     Jones, Simeon, St. John,                                    387
     Joseph, Abraham, Quebec,                                    274

                                   =K=

     Kay, Rev. John, Hamilton,                                   198
     Keating, Edward Henry, C.E., Halifax,                       214
     Keirstead, Rev. Elias M., M.A., Wolfville,                  493
     Kellond, Robert Arthur, Toronto,                            102
     Kelly, Francis, J.P., Joliette,                             565
     Kelly, Samuel James, M.D., M.S., Joliette,                  535
     Kelly, Thomas Eugene, Joliette,                             527
     Kelly, Thomas, Judge, Summerside,                            84
     Kemble, William, Quebec,                                    345
     Kennedy, George, M.A., LL.D., Toronto,                      142
     Kennedy, George Thomas, M.A., B.A.Sc., F.G.S.,              229
       Windsor,
     Kennedy, James Thomas, Indiantown,                     331, 815
     Kenny, Thomas Edward, M.P., Halifax,                        729
     Ker, Rev. Robert, Mitchell,                                 295
     Kerr, W., M.A., Q.C., LL.D., Cobourg,                       290
     Kerr, W. W. Hastings, Q.C., Montreal,                       619
     Kilgour, Robert, Toronto,                                   278
     Killam, Amasa Emerson, M.P.P., Moncton,                     398
     Kincaid, Robert, M.D., Peterboro’,                          591
     King, Edwin David, M.A., Q.C., Halifax,                     249
     King, James, Quebec,                                        562
     Klein, Alphonse B., Walkerton,                              771
     Klotz, Otto, Preston,                                        26
     Knowles, Charles William, Windsor, N.S.,                    310

                                   =L=

     Labelle, Capt. Jean B., M.P., Montreal,                     189
     Labelle, Rev. F. X. A., St. Jerome,                         358
     Lacerte, Elie, M.D., Three Rivers,                          618
     Lachapelle, E. P., M.D., Montreal,                          261
     Lafrance, Charles Joseph, Quebec,                           622
     Lake, John Neilson, Toronto,                                 96
     Laliberté, Jean Baptiste, Quebec,                           353
     Lamarche, Felix Oliver, Berthierville,                      582
     Lambly, William Harwood, Inverness,                         170
     La Mothe, G. J. B., Montreal,                                94
     Langevin, Hon. Sir Hector Louis, K.C.M.G., Q.C.,            748
       M.P., Ottawa,
     La Rocque, Basile, M.D., St. John’s,                        732
     La Rocque, Gedeon, M.D., Quebec,                            484
     La Rocque, Rev. Paul S., St. Hyacinthe,                     701
     La Rocque, Right Rev. Bishop Charles,                       689
     La Rocque, Right Rev. Bishop Joseph,                        712
     Larue, Hon. Jules Ernest, Judge, Quebec,                    628
     La Rue, Thomas George, Quebec,                              370
     Laurie, Maj.-Gen. J. W., M.P., Oakfield,               356, 816
     Laurier, Hon. Wilfrid, B.C.L., Q.C., M.P., Quebec,          592
     Laviolette, Hon. J. G., M.L.C., Montreal,                   320
     Law, William, M.P.P., Yarmouth,                             356
     Lawson, John A., Charlottetown,                             460
     Lawson, Prof. Geo., Ph.D., LL.D., F.I.C., F.R.S.C.,         717
       Halifax,
     Leach, Ven. Archdeacon William Turnbull, D.C.L.,            134
       LL.D.,
     Leblanc, P. E., M.P.P., Montreal,                           782
     Leclerc, Rev. J. U., Montreal,                              753
     Lefebvre, Guillaume, Waterloo, Q.,                          721
     Lefebvre, Joseph Herbert, Waterloo, Q.,                     587
     Le May, Léon Pamphile, Quebec,                              220
     Lemieux, François Xavier, M.P.P., Quebec,                   601
     LePan, Frederick N. D’Orr, Owen Sound,                       68
     Lewis, W. J., M.D., M.P.P., Hillsborough,                   316
     Long, Thomas, Collingwood,                                   81
     Longley, Hon. James Wilberforce, M.P.P., M.E.C.,            186
       Halifax,
     Longworth, Hon. John, Q.C.,                                 329
     Loranger, Hon, L. O., Judge, Montreal,                      299
     Lord, Major Artemas, Charlottetown,                         219
     Lorrain, Right Rev. Narcisse Zephirin, Bishop,              193
       Pembroke,
     Lount, William, Q.C., Toronto,                              743
     Lugrin, Charles H., A.M., Fredericton,                      382
     Lugrin, Charles S., Fredericton,                            407
     Lyall, Rev. William, LL.D., Halifax,                        233
     Lyman, F. S., B.A., B.C.L., Montreal,                       313

                                  =Mc=

     McCaffrey, Charles, Nicolet,                                544
     McCallum, G. A., M.D., Dunville,                            418
     McCaul, Rev. John, D.D., Toronto,                           165
     McClelan, Hon. Abner Reid, Hopewell,                        349
     McConnell, J., M.D., M.C.P.S.O., Toronto,                   367
     McConnell, J. B., M.D., C.M., Montreal,                     386
     McConnel, William George, Berthierville,                    490
     McConville, Joseph Norbet Alfred, Joliette,                 541
     McCosh, John, Orillia,                                       74
     McDonald, A. R., River du Loup (_en bas_),                  279
     McDonald, Hon. J., Chief Justice, Halifax,                  712
     McDonald, Rev. Clinton Donald, B.A., B.L., B.D.,            505
       M.A., Ph.D., B.Sc., Thorold,
     McEachran, Professor Duncan McNab, F.R.C.V.S.,              162
       Montreal,
     McGee, Hon. T. D’Arcy, B.C.L., M.R.I.A.,                    302
     McHenry, Donald C., M.A., Cobourg,                          482
     McIsaac, Angus, Judge, Antigonish,                          388
     McIsaac, Colin F., M.P.P., Antigonish,                      395
     McIlwraith, Thomas, Hamilton,                               722
     McIntyre, Right Rev. P., D.D., Charlottetown,               110
     McKinnon, Hon. John, M.P.P., Whycocomagh,                   410
     McKnight, Robert, Owen Sound,                               392
     McLachlan, Alexander, Erin,                                 411
     McLelan, Hon. Archibald Woodbury, M.P.,                     703
     McLellan, Hon. David, M.P.P., Indiantown,                   433
     McLeod, Hon. Neil, M.A., Charlottetown,                     220
     McLeod, Howard Douglas, St. John,                           387
     McLeod, Hon. J. D., M.L.C., Pictou,                         764
     McLeod, Rev. Joseph, D.D., Fredericton,                     137
     McMaster, Hon. William, Toronto,                            286
     McMicken, Hon. Gilbert, Winnipeg,                           346
     McMillan, John, M.D., Pictou,                               711
     McNeil, Hon. Daniel, Port Hood,                             381
     McNeill, John Sears, M.P.P., Barton,                        180
     McNicoll, David, Montreal,                                  662
     McPherson, R. B., Thorold,                                  154
     McRitchie, Rev. George, Prescott,                           215

                                   =M=

     Macallum, A., M.A., LL.B., Hamilton,                        738
     MacCallum, D. C., M.D., M.R.C.S., Montreal,                 138
     MacColl, Evan, Kingston,                                     95
     MacCoy, W. F., Q.C., M.P.P., Halifax,                       190
     Macdonald, Augustine Colin, Montague,                       354
     Macdonald, Charles De Wolf, B.A., Pictou,                   285
     Macdonald, Duncan, St. John’s,                              630
     Macdonald, Hon. A. A., Lieut.-Gov., Charlottetown,          466
     Macdonald, Hon. John, Senator, Toronto,                     579
     Macdonald, L. G., Q.C., St. John’s,                         543
     Macdonald, Lieut.-Col. C. J., Halifax,                      268
     Macdonald, Rev. J. C., Charlottetown,                       199
     Macdonald, R. Tyre, Sutton,                                 811
     Macdonald, Right Hon. Sir John Alexander, G.C.B.,           670
       D.C.L., LL.D., Ottawa,
     Macdonnell, Rev. D. J., B.D., Toronto,                      196
     MacDowall, D. H., M.P., Prince Albert,                      611
     MacFarlane, Foster, M.D., Fairville, St. John,               39
     Macfarlane, Thomas, Ottawa,                                  88
     MacGillivray, Hon. A., Antigonish,                          767
     Machin, Henry Turner, Quebec,                               554
     Mackay, Alexander Howard, B.A., B.Sc., F.S.Sc.,             210
       Pictou, N.S.,
     Mackay, N. E., M.D., C.M., M.R.C.S., Halifax,               269
     Mackay, W., M.D., M.P.P., Reserve Mines,                    556
     Mackenzie, Hon. A., P.C., M.P., Toronto,                    522
     Mackenzie, J. M., Moncton,                                  798
     MacKinnon, Tristiam A., Montreal,                           502
     Mackintosh, Charles H., Ottawa,                             446
     Maclaren, James, Buckingham,                                540
     MacLean, Alexander, Ottawa,                                 284
     MacLeod, Rev. John M., Charlottetown,                        46
     MacMahon, Hon. Hugh, Judge, Toronto,                        733
     Macpherson, Alexander, Montreal,                            778
     Macpherson, Henry, Judge, Owen Sound,                       200
     MacVicar, Rev. Malcolm, Ph.D., LL.D., Toronto,               30
     Madill, Frank, M.A., M.P., Beaverton,                       528
     Magnan, Adolphe, N.P., Joliette,                            637
     Mara, J. A., M.P., Kamloops,                                784
     Martin, Joseph, LL.B., Quebec,                              555
     Mason, T. G., Toronto,                                      811
     Masson, Hon. Louis François Roderique,                 346, 816
     Masson, James, Q.C., M.P., Owen Sound,                      666
     Matheson, David, Ottawa,                                    688
     Matheson, Hon. Roderick,                                    459
     Matheson, Lieut.-Col. Arthur James, Perth,                  465
     Mathews, Rev. George D., D.D., Quebec,                      258
     Mathieu, Hon. Michel, Judge, Montreal,                      265
     Mathison, George, Quebec,                                    66
     Maunsell, Lieut.-Col. G. J., Fredericton,                   102
     Maynard, Rev. T., M.A., D.D., Windsor,                      491
     Medley, Rev. C. S., B.A., Sussex,                           284
     Meek, Edward, Toronto,                                      725
     Mellish, John Thomas, M.A., Halifax,                   246, 816
     Mercier, Hon. Honoré, M.P.P., Premier, Quebec,              234
     Meredith, Sir William Collis, K.B., D.C.L., LL.D.,          223
       Quebec,
     Merritt, Jedediah Prendergast, St. Catharines,              714
     Methot, Joseph Edouard, Three Rivers,                       648
     Méthot, Right Rev. M. E., A.M., D.D., Quebec,               342
     Miller, John Stewart, M.P.P., Centreville,                  341
     Milligan, Rev. George M., B.A., Toronto,                     79
     Mills, John Burpee, M.P., Annapolis,                        666
     Mitchell, Hon. James, St. Stephen,                           39
     Mitchell, Samuel E., Pembroke,                              217
     Moffat, William, Pembroke,                                  413
     Moles, Robert George, Arnprior,                             327
     Molony, Thomas J., LL.B., Quebec,                           655
     Monk, Hon. S. C., LL.D., Judge, Montreal,                   537
     Montagu, Walter H., M.D., M.P., Dunville,                   686
     Montgomery, Donald, Charlottetown,                          568
     Moodie, Mrs. Susanna,                                       710
     Moody, James Cochrane, M.D., Windsor,                       435
     Moody, Rev. John T. T., D.D., Yarmouth,                     247
     Moore, Alvan Head, Magog,                              567, 816
     Moore, Dennis, Hamilton,                                    792
     Moore, Paul Robinson, M.D., Sackville,                       35
     Moreau, Right Rev. Bishop L. Z., St. Hyacinthe,             584
     Morin, Eusebe, St. Hyacinthe,                               611
     Morin, Louis Edmond, Quebec,                                385
     Morris, John Lang, B.C.L., Q.C., Montreal,                  747
     Morrison, Alfred Gidney, Halifax,                           464
     Morison, Lewis Francis, St. Hyacinthe,                      697
     Morrow, John, Toronto,                                      223
     Morse, Hon. W. A. D., Judge, Amherst,                       222
     Morson, W. A. O., Charlottetown,                             92
     Motton, Robert, Q.C., Halifax,                              783
     Mountain, Right Rev. G. J., Bishop, Quebec,                 439
     Mountcastle, Clara H., Clinton,                             292
     Mowat, Hon. O., Q.C., LL.D., Toronto,                       559
     Mowatt, Rev. Andrew Joseph, Fredericton,                     38
     Murchie, James, St. Stephen,                                221
     Murphy, Martin, C.E., Halifax,                              319
     Murphy, Owen, M.P.P., Quebec,                               208
     Murray, Lieut.-Col. John Robert, Halifax,                   717
     Murray, William, Sherbrooke,                                800

                                   =N=

     Nantel, G. A., M.P.P., St. Jerome,                          669
     Nault, Joseph, St, Hyacinthe,                               450
     Nelles, Rev. Samuel Sobieski, D.D., LL.D.,                  363
     Nelson, Hon. Hugh, Lieut-Governor, Victoria,                649
     Nettleton, John, Collingwood,                               161
     Nolin, Charles, Sheriff, St. John’s,                        502
     Norman, Rev. Richard Whitmore, M.A., D.C.L.,                 74
       Montreal,
     Normand, Telesphore Euzebe, Three Rivers,                   682
     Norquay, Hon. John, M.P.P., Winnipeg,                       479
     Noyes, John Powell, Q.C., Waterloo, Q.,                     605

                                   =O=

     O’Connor, Hon. John,                                        412
     Ogden, Charles Kinnis, Three Rivers,                        511
     Ogden, W. W., B.M., M.D., Toronto,                          716
     Ogilvie, Hon. A. W., Senator, Montreal,                     131
     Ostigny, Joseph Henry, Joliette,                            545
     O’Sullivan, D. A., M.A., D.C.L., Toronto,                   592
     Otter, Lieut.-Col. William Dillon, Toronto,                 620
     Ouellette, Rev. J. R., St. Hyacinthe,                       677
     Ouimet, Hon. Gédéon, Q.C., D.C.L., Quebec,                  450
     Ouimet, Hon. Lieut.-Col. Aldric Joseph, LL.B., Q.C.,        413
       M P., Montreal,
     Oulton, Alfred E., Judge, Dorchester,                       394
     Owens, John, St. John,                                      548
     Owens, William, M.P.P., Lachute,                            410

                                   =P=

     Pacaud, Ernest, Quebec,                                     405
     Pacaud, Gaspard, M.P.P., Windsor,                           558
     Palmer, Caleb Read, J.P., Moncton,                          135
     Panneton, Louis Edmond, Q.C., B.C.L., LL.D.,           351, 816
       Sherbrooke,
     Papineau, Hon. Louis Joseph,                                679
     Paquet, Hon. A. H., M.D., St. Cuthbert,                     535
     Paquet, Rev. Benjamin, Quebec,                              531
     Park, William A., M.P.P., Newcastle, N.B.,                  322
     Parker, Rev. W. R., M.A., D.D., Toronto,                    516
     Partridge, Rev. F., M.A., D.D., Halifax,                    644
     Paton, Andrew, Sherbrooke,                                  448
     Paton, Hugh, Montreal,                                      396
     Patton, Hon. James, Q.C., LL.D., Toronto,                   174
     Payan, Paul, St. Hyacinthe,                                 638
     Payzant, J. Y., M.A., Halifax,                              778
     Peck, Charles Allison, Hopewell Hill,                       451
     Pelland, B. L., Berthierville,                              810
     Pelletier, Hon. H. C., Judge, Rimouski,                     275
     Pelton, S. H., Q.C., Yarmouth,                              296
     Perley, William Dell, M.P., Wolseley,                       665
     Perrigo, James, M.A., M.D., M.R.C.S., Montreal,             284
     Peters, Simon, J.P., Quebec,                                459
     Peterson, Peter Alexander, C.E., Montreal,                  707
     Pettit, Rev. Charles Biggar, M.A., Cornwall,                724
     Phelan, Cornelius J. F. R., M.D., C.M., Waterloo,           595
       Q.,
     Phillips, Rev. Caleb T., Woodstock,                         432
     Philp, Rev. John, M.A., Montreal,                           395
     Piché, E. U., Berthierville,                                780
     Pickard, Rev. Humphrey, D.D., Sackville,                    140
     Pidgeon, J. R., J.P., Indiantown,                           455
     Pim, Richard, Toronto,                                      563
     Pipes, Hon. W. T., Amherst,                                 791
     Plumb, Hon. Josiah Burr, Niagara,                           706
     Pope, Edwin, Quebec,                                        512
     Pope, Hon. James Colledge,                                  605
     Pope, Hon. John Henry, M.P., Ottawa,                        650
     Pope, Hon. Joseph, Charlottetown,                           417
     Pope, P. W. T., Charlottetown,                              428
     Poupore, Wm. Joseph, M.P.P., Chichester,                    645
     Power, Hon. L. G., LL.B., Halifax,                          503
     Power, Michael Joseph, Halifax,                             530
     Prefontaine, R. F., B.C.L., M.P., Montreal,                 779
     Prévost, Major Oscar A., Quebec,                            612
     Price, Evan John, Quebec,                                   628
     Price, Herbert Molesworth, Quebec,                          594
     Prince, Right Rev. John C., Bishop,                         689
     Prior, James, Merritton,                                    600
     Proudfoot, Hon. William, Judge, Toronto,                    270
     Proulx, Hon. Jean Baptiste George, Nicolet,                 607
     Pugsley, Hon. William, D.C.L., St. John,                    649
     Purcell, Patrick, M.P., Summertown,                    669, 816

                                   =Q=

     Quinton, William A., M.P.P., Fairville,                     632

                                   =R=

     Radenhurst, W. H., Perth,                                   719
     Ratcliffe, John,                                            546
     Ratcliffe, Rev. J. H., St. Catharines,                      378
     Raymond, Rev. Joseph Sabin, St. Hyacinthe,                  686
     Read, John, Stratford,                                      416
     Read, Rev. P. C., M.A., Lennoxville,                        704
     Reddin, James Henry, Charlottetown,                          54
     Reddy, John, M.D.,                                           85
     Reed, Robert, St. John,                                     557
     Reid, Rev. Charles Peter, Sherbrooke,                       530
     Rexford, Rev. Elson Irving, B.A., Quebec,                   486
     Reesor, Hon. D., Toronto,                                   704
     Rice, Charles, Perth,                                        75
     Richard, Rev. Cannon Louis, A.M., Three Rivers,             476
     Richey, Hon. Matthew H., Q.C., D.C.L., Lieut.-Gov.,         380
       Halifax,
     Richey, Rev. Matthew, D.D.,                                 471
     Ritchie, Hon. J. N., Judge, Halifax,                        193
     Ritchie, Hon. Robert J., M.P.P., St. John,                  702
     Rivard, A. M., M.D., Sheriff, Joliette,                     568
     Robb, Alexander, Amherst,                                   179
     Robb, David W., Amherst,                                    183
     Roberts, C. G. D., M.A., Windsor, N.S.,                     368
     Robertson, Andrew, Montreal,                                314
     Robertson, George, St. John,                                336
     Robertson, Henry, LL.B., Collingwood,                       808
     Robertson, Hon. T., Judge, Hamilton,                        799
     Robertson, N., Walkerton,                                   776
     Robillard, Alexander, M.P.P., Russel,                       486
     Robinson, D. A., M.D., Coaticook,                           751
     Robinson, Samuel Skiffington, Orillia,                      252
     Robitaille, Louis Adolphe, Quebec,                          663
     Roche, William, Jr., M.P.P., Halifax,                       217
     Rogers, Henry Cassady, Peterboro’,                     147, 816
     Rogers, Lieut.-Col. R. Z., Grafton,                         765
     Rogers, Rev. Jabez A., Windsor, N.S.,                       534
     Rolland, Hon. J. B., Montreal,                              793
     Rose, George Maclean, Toronto,                              731
     Rose, Hon. John E., LL.D., Judge, Toronto,                  737
     Rosebrugh, John W., M.D., Hamilton,                         314
     Ross, Alexander Milton, M.D., Montreal,                     118
     Ross, Hon. David Alexander, Q.C., Quebec,                   300
     Ross, Hon. James Gibb, Quebec,                              648
     Ross, Hon. William, Halifax,                                189
     Ross, James Duncan, M.D., Moncton,                          136
     Rottot, Jean Philippe, M.D., Montreal,                      128
     Rourke, James, St. Martin’s,                                375
     Rousseau, Joseph Thomas, St. Hyacinthe,                     518
     Routhier, Hon. A. B., LL.D., Quebec,                        755
     Roy, Rouer Joseph, Q.C., Montreal,                          667
     Ruel, James Rhodes, St. John,                               228
     Russell, Willis, Quebec,                                    535
     Rutherford, John, J.P., Owen Sound,                         289
     Ryan, Hon. Patrick George, M.P.P., Caraquet,                736

                                   =S=

     Saint-Cyr, D. N. D., Quebec,                                379
     Saint-Pierre, Henri C., Montreal,                            69
     Sanderson, Rev. Dr. G. R., Sarnia,                           65
     Sandford, Hon. W. E., Hamilton,                             753
     Sangster, Charles, Kingston,                                423
     Scarth, William Bain, M.P., Winnipeg,                       624
     Schiller, Charles Edward, Montreal,                         677
     Scott, Capt. Peter Astle, R.N.,                             700
     Scott, Hon. Richard W., Q.C., Ottawa,                       758
     Scott, Lieut.-Col. Thomas, Winnipeg,                        715
     Sears, Lieut. James Walker, Toronto,                        606
     Sedgewick, Robert, Q.C., Halifax,                           422
     Sénécal, Hon. Louis Adelard, Montreal,                      452
     Senkler, William Stevens, Judge, Perth,                      52
     Seymour, James, St. Catharines,                             544
     Shakespeare, Noah, Victoria,                           297, 816
     Shannon, Hon. S. L., D.C.L., Halifax,                       756
     Shaw, Lieut.-Col. James,                                     68
     Shearer, James Traill, Montreal,                            654
     Shehyn, Hon. Joseph, M.P.P., Quebec,                        539
     Shields, John, Toronto,                                     551
     Shorey, Hollis, Montreal,                                   651
     Shortt, Rev. William, B. D., Walkerton,                     747
     Sicotte, Hon. Louis Victor, St. Hyacinthe,                  438
     Sifton, Hon. John Wright, Brandon,                           46
     Silver, William Chamberlain, Halifax,                       318
     Simcoe, Lieut.-General John Graves,                         181
     Sinclair, Donald, Walkerton,                                757
     Skinner, Hon. Charles N., Q.C., St. John,                   401
     Slack, Edward, Waterloo, Q.,                                463
     Slaven, John Wallace, Orillia,                              650
     Smart, William Lynn, Hamilton,                              468
     Smith, Andrew, F.R.C.V.S., Toronto,                         726
     Smith, A. Lapthorn, B.A., M.D., Montreal,                   681
     Smith, G. B., M.P.P., Toronto,                              791
     Smith, Rev. H. Percy W., Dunnville,                         209
     Smith, Rev. James Cowie, M.A., B.D., Guelph,                680
     Smith, Rev. John, Toronto,                                  515
     Smith, John H., Buffalo,                                     56
     Smith, Robert Barry, Moncton,                               331
     Smith, Robert Herbert, Quebec,                              462
     Smith, William, M.P., Columbus,                             503
     Spencer, Charles Worthington, Montreal,                     507
     Spencer, E. E., M.P.P., Frelighsburg,                       382
     Sprague, Thomas Farmer, M.D., Woodstock,                    145
     Starnes, Hon. Lieut-Col. Henry, Montreal,                   749
     Steadman, James, Fredericton,                               543
     Steele, Rev. D. A., A.M., Amherst,                          264
     Steeves, Chipman Archibald, Moncton,                        326
     Steeves, James Thomas, M.D., St. John,                      151
     Stennett, Rev. Canon Walter, M.A., Cobourg,                 272
     Stephen, Alexander, Halifax,                                762
     Stephen, Sir George, Baronet, Montreal,                     231
     Stephenson, Major James, Montreal,                          665
     Sterling, Alexander Addison, Fredericton,                   705
     Stevens, Hon. Gardner Green, Waterloo, Q.,                  585
     Stevens, Rev. Lorenzo Gorham, A.M., B.D., Portland,          25
       N.B.,
     Stevenson, Major S. C., Montreal,                           492
     Stewart, George Jr., D.C.L., F.R.G.S., F.R.S.C.,            227
       Quebec,
     Stewart, John, Woodstock,                                   204
     Stewart, Rev. William James, Portland, N.B.,                 37
     St. George, Percival Walter, C.E., Montreal,                134
     St. George, Rev. Charles, Iberville,                        720
     Stockton, Alfred Augustus, D.C.L., Ph.D., LL.D.,            116
       M.P.P., St. John,
     Strachan, Right Rev. John, LL.D., D.D.,                     371
     Strange, Major-General T. B., Kingston,                     784
     Stratford, John H., Brantford,                          58, 816
     Strothard, Rev. James, Halifax,                             334
     Stuart, Sir Andrew, Knight, Quebec,                         640
     Sturdee, Henry L., M.A., Portland, N.B.,                    426
     Sutherland, Hugh McKay, Winnipeg,                           620
     Sutherland, Rev. Alexander, D.D., Toronto,                   86
     Sullivan, Hon. W. W., Charlottetown,                        429
     Sweeny, Right Rev. John, D.D., R.C. Bishop, St.             455
       John,

                                   =T=

     Taché, Eugene Etienne, Quebec,                              376
     Taillon, Alphonse Antoine, Sorel,                           537
     Talbot, Hon. Thomas,                                        157
     Tartre, Joseph Raphael, M.P., Waterloo, Q.,                 593
     Taschereau, His Eminence Elzéar-Alexandre, Cardinal,        625
       Quebec,
     Taschereau, Hon. Henry T., B.L., B.C.L., Judge,             410
       Montreal,
     Taschereau, Hon. H. E., Judge, Ottawa,                      434
     Taschereau, Hon. J. T., LL.D., Quebec,                      610
     Taylor, Henry, Perth,                                        78
     Tellier, Hon. Louis, Judge, St. Hyacinthe,                  443
     Tessier, Jules, M.P.P., Quebec,                             608
     Tetreau, Rev. F., St. Hyacinthe,                            508
     Thomas, N. W., Coaticook,                                   763
     Thomas, Rev. B. D., D.D., Toronto,                          379
     Thompson, David,                                            727
     Thompson, Hon. J. S. D., Q.C., M.P., Ottawa,                283
     Thompson, Lieut.-Col. D. C., Quebec,                        394
     Thorne, William Henry, St. John,                            306
     Thornton, John, Coaticook,                                  439
     Tilley, Sir S. L., K.C.M.G., Fredericton,                    60
     Tims, Frank Dillon, Quebec,                                 545
     Tomkins, Rev. John,                                         652
     Tooke, Benjamin, Montreal,                                  699
     Torey, Edgar J.,                                            705
     Torrance, David,                                            400
     Torrance, Hon. F. W., B.C.L., Montreal,                     393
     Torrance, Rev. Robert, D.D., Guelph,                         33
     Torrington, Frederick Herbert, Toronto,                     546
     Tourangeau, Adolphe G., Quebec,                             477
     Trenaman, Thomas, M.D., Halifax,                            554
     Trueman, Hermon Silas, M.D., Sackville,                     335
     Tupper, Hon, Sir Charles, G.C.M.G., C.B., D.C.L.,           642
       Ottawa,
     Turcotte, Hon. Arthur, Q.C., Three Rivers,                  445
     Turnbull, Lieut.-Col. James Ferdinand, Quebec,              403
     Turnbull, William Wallace, St. John,                        143
     Tyrwhitt, Lieut.-Col. R., M.P., Bradford,                   461

                                   =U=

     Underhay, J. C., M.P.P., Bay Fortune,                       415
     Unsworth, Joseph Lennon, Charlottetown,                     653
     Ure, Rev. Robert, D.D., Goderich,                           375
     Ussher, Right Rev. B. B., M.D., Montreal,                    19

                                   =V=

     Valin, Pierre, Vincent, Chateau Richer,                     383
     Vallee, Thomas E. A., M.D., Quebec,                         538
     Van Horne, William C., Montreal,                            469
     Van Koughnet, S. J., Q.C., Toronto,                         795
     Van Wyck, Rev. James, Toronto,                              152
     Vaughan, William, St. Martins,                              458
     Vidal, Major Henry Beaufort, Toronto,                       533

                                   =W=

     Wade, Edward Harper, Quebec,                                430
     Waddell, John, M.D.,                                         29
     Wainwright, William, Montreal,                              736
     Walker, Thomas, M.D., St. John,                             538
     Wallace, Joseph James, Truro,                               298
     Wallace, Rev. Robert, Toronto,                              418
     Wallbridge, Hon. Lewis,                                     374
     Wallis, Herbert, Montreal,                                   81
     Wanless, John, M.D., Montreal,                              128
     Watson, George, Collingwood,                                125
     Webster, Walter Chester, Coaticook,                         678
     Weeks, Otto Swartz, M.P.P., Halifax,                        668
     Wedderburn, Hon. W., Judge, Hampton,                        150
     Weir, W., Montreal,                                         527
     Weldon, R. C., B.A., Ph.D., M.P., Halifax,                  661
     Weller, C. A., Judge, Peterborough,                         673
     Wells, Hon. R. M., Toronto,                                 639
     Welton, Rev. Daniel Morse, D.D., Toronto,                   529
     Whelan, Hon. Edward, Charlottetown,                         414
     Whidden, Charles Blanchard, Antigonish,                     190
     White, Hon. Thomas, M.P., Ottawa,                           744
     Whitney, Henry A., Moncton,                                 364
     Wickwire, William Nathan, M.D., Halifax,                    265
     Wild, Rev. Joseph, M.A., D.D., Toronto,                      82
     Wilkinson, W., Judge, Bushville, Chatham,                   270
     Willets, Rev. Charles E., M.A., D.C.L., Windsor,            687
       N.S.,
     Williams, Rev. John Æ., D.D., Toronto,                      294
     Williams, Rev. William, D.D., Cobourg,                      175
     Williams, Richard Wellington, Three Rivers,                 495
     Williams, Right Rev. James W., D.D., Bishop, Quebec,        434
     Williams, Thomas, Moncton,                                  140
     Wilmot, Hon. R. D., Fredericton,                            765
     Willmott, J. B., M.D.S., D.D.S., Toronto,                   173
     Wilson, Daniel, LL.D., F.R.S, Toronto,                      338
     Wilson, J. C., M.P., Montreal,                              149
     Wilson, Rev. Robert, St. John,                               80
     Withall, William John, Montreal,                            520
     Wood, Rev. Enoch, D.D.,                                     585
     Wood, Robert Edwin, Peterborough,                           244
     Woodland, Rev. James Barnaby, Yarmouth,                     311
     Woodward, J. R., B.A., Sherbrooke,                          685
     Workman, Joseph, M.D., Toronto,                             204
     Worthington, Edward D., A.M., M.D., F.R.C.S.,               456
       Sherbrooke,
     Wright, Aaron A., Renfrew,                                   57
     Wright, Philemon,                                           631

                                   =Y=

     Young, Edward, Windsor,                                     800
     Young, Hon. Charles, LL.D., Q.C., Charlottetown,             18
     Young, Hon. James, Galt,                                    740
     Young, Sir William, LL.D.,                                  398




                             =A CYCLOPÆDIA=

                                  =OF=

                         =CANADIAN BIOGRAPHY.=

[Illustration]

=Cartier, Jacques.=—The ancient town of St. Malo, in France, had been
for centuries a nursery of hardy seamen, and among the most eminent on
its list stands the name of Jacques Cartier.—This celebrated navigator
was the first European who explored the shores of Canada to any extent.
On the 20th April, 1534, he sailed with two ships of three score tons
apiece burthen, and sixty-one well appointed men in each. He steered for
Newfoundland, which he reached in twenty days, passed through the
straits of Belle Isle, and advanced up the St. Lawrence, till he saw the
shores of Anticosti. The approach of winter caused him to return to
France. In the spring of 1535, he received a fresh commission, and three
vessels, named _La Grande Hermine_, _La Petite Hermine_ and
_L’Hémerillon_, the largest about 120 tons, were placed at his disposal.
On the 16th May, the officers and sailors assembled in the Cathedral at
St. Malo, where, after confession and hearing mass, they received a
parting blessing from the bishop, and, three days later, they set sail.
After experiencing very stormy weather, during which the vessels were
separated, they reached the coast of Newfoundland on the 26th July. On
the 10th August, it being the festival of St. Lawrence. Cartier gave
that name to the bay which he entered, and it was afterwards extended to
the river and gulf. On the 16th, he reached Stadacona (now Quebec).
Hearing from the Indians that a town of some importance stood by the
bank of the river, many days’ journey above, and named “Hochelaga,”
Cartier determined to go thither, and on the 19th September, he hoisted
sail, and with his pinnace and two small boats, departed on his journey
up the river. On the 28th he reached lake St. Peter. At the head of this
lake he was compelled to cast anchor on account of the shoals; and
finding it impossible to proceed further with his vessel
(_L’Hémerillon_), he took to his boats, and on the 2nd October, 1535, he
landed about six miles from the town, below the current St. Mary. After
he had gone about four miles, he was met by one of the chiefs,
accompanied by many of the natives, who gave him a cordial welcome.
Having seen all that he deemed worthy of notice in the village, Cartier
was conducted to the top of the mountain, the view from which filled him
with feelings of joy and gratification. In honour of his king he named
it “Mont Royal,” which name has been extended to the city. On his return
to the boats he was accompanied by a large number of natives, who
appeared to be anxious to have him stay longer. He, however, embarked
the same evening, and on the 4th October, he reached his vessel, in
which he passed down the St. Lawrence, and rejoined his company at
Stadacona. As the season was far advanced Cartier made the bold resolve
to winter in the country. His party suffered much during the winter from
want of proper food and clothing, and in addition to this, they were all
attacked by the scurvy, twenty-six of whom died. The remainder soon
recovered their health by the use of a decoction of the spruce fir,
which had been recommended to them by an Indian. When spring returned
Cartier sailed for France, taking with him several of the natives, and
among them, Donacona, a chief. None of them ever returned, all dying
before the French again visited Canada. On his return to France, Cartier
found his native land distracted with religious dissensions, and it was
not until 1541, that he sailed with five vessels, and full power to make
discoveries and settlements in Canada. Jean François de la Rocque,
superior of Roberval, was appointed by the king viceroy and lieutenant
of Canada, and was to have accompanied Cartier, but through insuperable
obstacles he was unable to leave until the next year, when he left with
three vessels, having on board two hundred persons, male and female.
Cartier passed the winter at Cape Rouge, where he erected a fort, but
fearing the natives he resolved to return to France. On his way he fell
in with Roberval, at St. John’s, Newfoundland, but he refused to return
with him to Canada, and proceeded on his way to France, where he died
shortly after his return. Cartier manifested in all his expeditions
adventurous courage. No contemporary navigator had as yet dared to
advance so far into the lands of the new world as he. In his braving the
rigours of a Canadian winter, and shutting himself up for six months,
without means of escape, he gave a signal example of the intrepidity of
the mariners of his time and country. Of right therefore in every sense,
he heads the long file of visitors of inner North America.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Young, Hon. Charles=, LL.D., Q.C., Judge of Surrogate and Probate,
Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island, was born on the 30th of April,
1812, at Glasgow, Scotland, and is the younger brother of Sir William
Young, Chief Justice of Nova Scotia. The father of these illustrious men
was John Young, of Falkirk, Stirlingshire, Scotland, and subsequently of
Halifax, Nova Scotia. Judge Young received his early education in
Dalhousie College, Halifax, and studied law in the office of his
brother, Sir William Young, in that city. He was called to the bar of
Nova Scotia in 1838, and to the bar of Prince Edward Island the same
year. He practised his profession for a short time with his brothers,
Sir William and the Hon. George Young, now deceased; and on November
23rd, 1847, was created a Queen’s Counsel, being the first barrister in
Prince Edward Island on which this honour was conferred. Judge Young
entered public life a young man in 1840, where he was returned for
Queen’s County to the Island Assembly, and in December following, he was
appointed to the Legislative Council. In this latter body he accepted a
seat until 1863, ten years of which period he acted as president. He
filled the office of Attorney-General from 28th May, 1851 to the 2nd of
May, 1852; and from 26th June, 1858 to 11th April, 1859; and held the
commission under the Royal Sign Manual as administrator of the
Government of the Island for four years. Judge Young has the honour of
being the first public man who advocated the question of responsible
government for the Island, and he and his co-workers had the pleasure of
seeing this boon granted in 1851, together with other important reforms,
such as free schools, free lands for tenantry, savings banks, etc. He
received his appointment as judge of probate in 1852, and judge in
bankruptcy in 1868. On retiring from the latter position in March, 1875,
he was presented with the following address, which was signed by every
member of the bar in Prince Edward Island, viz:—

    “_To His Honour Judge Young, LL.D., etc._

    “SIR,—We, the undersigned barristers and attorneys, cannot
    permit the opportunity to pass of your honour’s retiring from
    the judgeship of the Insolvent Debtor’s Court—the jurisdiction
    of which is now merged in another court by virtue of ‘The
    Insolvent Act, 1875,’ of the Dominion of Canada—without
    expressing our entire satisfaction at the manner in which you
    presided over the meetings of the court; and at the same time
    thanking you for your many courtesies extended to us during the
    eight years Your Honour presided over said court.—(Signed), F.
    Brecken, Attorney-General; W. W. Sullivan, Solicitor-General;
    John Longworth, Q.C.; Charles Palmer, Q.C.; Charles Binns,
    Richard Reddin, E. H. Haviland, Edward J. Hodgson, Louis H.
    Davies, R. R. Fitzgerald, W. D. Haszard, Henry E. Wright,
    Malcolm McLeod, Neil McLean.

    “Charlottetown, P.E.I., March 29th, 1876.”

To which His Honour Judge Young replied:—

    “GENTLEMEN,—Be pleased to accept my best thanks for the address
    you have so unexpectedly presented, and be assured that I do
    most highly value it on account of the expressions it contains
    of your entire satisfaction with the manner in which I have
    presided over the Insolvent Debtor’s Court for the last eight
    years. Where I have always been treated with marked
    consideration by yourselves, gentlemen, I could not do otherwise
    than reciprocate the courtesies to which you kindly refer.
    (Signed),

                                                 “CHARLES YOUNG.”

While Judge Young was practising at the bar, he had a large and
lucrative business, and was generally engaged on one side or the other
in most of the leading cases then before the courts. He was invariably
retained on behalf of those he was pleased to style the “Bleeding
tenantry of Prince Edward Island” against the landlords, and generally
succeeded in gaining a verdict in favour of his clients. He was always
the friend and advocate of the oppressed. It is pleasing to note here
that Judge Young has held no position which he has not adorned. In
office and out of office he has rendered great service to the community.
In 1838, a Mechanics’ Institute was established in Charlottetown, mainly
through his efforts, and he had the honour of delivering the
introductory lecture, which was afterwards published in the _Gazette_.
He has since 1845 taken a very deep interest in the cause of temperance,
and was Grand Worthy Patriarch of the Sons of Temperance of Prince
Edward Island several terms, and is a member of the National Division of
the Sons of Temperance of North America. He is also an active member of
the Methodist church, a local preacher, and a Bible-class teacher, and
fills several other important offices in that church. He was
instrumental in founding the second Methodist church in Charlottetown,
and is president of Prince Edward Island Auxiliary Bible Society. The
Judge is a thorough working Christian. The degree of LL.D. was conferred
upon him by the Newton (United States) University; and in 1858 he was
offered the honour of knighthood by Her Majesty, but respectfully
declined the royal gift. In Masonry he takes an interest, and belongs to
the Royal Arch Chapter. In 1838 Judge Young married Lucretia, daughter
of John Starr, of Halifax, Nova Scotia, and he and his wife, there being
no children, enjoy life in their beautiful home, “Fairholm,”
Charlottetown.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Ussher, The Right Rev. Brandram Boileau,= M.D., Montreal, Bishop of the
Reformed Episcopal church in the Dominion of Canada and the Island of
Newfoundland, was born in the city of Dublin, Ireland, on the 6th day of
August, 1845. He is the youngest son of Captain Richard Beverly Ussher,
late of H. M. 86th Regt., and Henrietta Ussher (_née_ Boileau). On both
sides of the house his ancestors were most distinguished. Captain R. B.
Ussher was descended from Richard Neville, the great Earl of Warwick,
one of whose descendants (for political reasons took the name of the
office which he bore, viz., Usher of the Black Rod, thus retaining his
influential and lucrative position when the name of Neville had become
unpopular and the “Kingmaker’s” influence had waned,) subsequently
settled in Ireland. To distinguish the family name from the office, the
second letter, s, was added some eighty years ago. The subject of this
sketch is descended from a long line of churchmen. His great-grandfather
was rector of the parish of Clontarf, near Dublin, which was held in the
family from father to son for over one hundred and fifty years. The Rev.
John Ussher, afterwards Astronomer Royal for Ireland, was the last of
the family to hold the incumbency. His sons were Rear-Admiral Sir Thomas
Ussher, K.C.A., who figured in the history of the great Napoleon, taking
him to Elba in H.M.S. _Undaunted_. He died Naval Commander-in-Chief, at
Cork, Ireland, and lies buried in one of the vaults of Monkstown church,
County Dublin—his record was that of a gallant sailor. John Ussher, of
Woodpark, who left four sons, the youngest of whom, Richard Beverly, was
the father of Bishop Ussher, of Montreal. He is directly descended from
Archbishop Henry Ussher, one of the founders of Trinity College, Dublin,
whose brother Arland was the father of James Ussher (Trinity’s first
student, buried in Henry VII. Chapel in Westminster Abbey), the
celebrated Primate of Ireland, author of “Ussher’s Chronology,” etc.,
with whom the Duke of Wellington was also connected, owing to the fact
that Mary Ussher married Henry Colley, of Castle Carberry, who was the
mother of the first Lord Mornington, who was the grandfather of the Duke
of Wellington. The Venerable Archdeacon Adam Ussher, rector of Clontarf,
was the brother of the above named Mary Ussher and son of Sir William
Ussher, clerk of the Council. The Rectory of Clontarf descended to his
son Frederick, and from him to his son Henry Ussher, D.D., who held the
Andrew’s Professorship of Astronomy in Trinity College, Dublin, and from
him is directly descended Captain R. B. Ussher, the father of the Right
Rev. Bishop Ussher. Three hundred years ago two brothers of the name of
Ussher were driven from Ireland during one of the troubles, and settled
in the neighbourhood of Melrose, in Scotland, where they acquired
considerable lands, and amongst them the property of Huntley-burn, one
of the most celebrated spots on the Borders. The grandfather of the
present Thomas Ussher, of Edinburgh, for seventeen years secretary of
the Borders’ County Association for the Advancement of Education (and
out of which arose the celebration of the centenary of Sir Walter
Scott), sold to Sir Walter Scott the chief part of the estate of
Abbotsford (_vide_ “Lockhart’s Life of Scott”). By unbroken tradition
this branch claims kinship with Archbishop Ussher; and the Rev. W.
Neville Ussher, cousin of the above named Thomas Ussher, is a canon of
the Cathedral in Edinburgh. The Ussher family have had the honour of
having four distinguished church dignitaries; two Archbishops of Armagh;
one Bishop of Kildare (Robert Ussher); and Bishop B. B. Ussher, of
Montreal, who has at present five surviving brothers and two sisters as
follow:—Major-General John Theophilus Ussher, Beverly Ussher, Henry
Ussher, M.B., Rev. P. R. C. Ussher, a prominent minister in Australia;
and James Ussher, solicitor; Henrietta Buchanan and Arabella Madelina
Buchanan. On his mother’s side Bishop Ussher has an equally
distinguished ancestry, the Boileau family being one of the few that can
trace their genealogy back without a break for a period of over six
hundred years. The present Baron Boileau de Castleneau is the
seventeenth in descent from Etienne Boileau, who, born early in the
thirteenth century, was appointed by Louis IX., in the year 1255, Grand
Provost of Paris, at that period the highest officer of state. In 1371,
Jean Boileau was ennobled by Charles V. At the revocation of the Edict
of Nantes, A.D. 1685, Jacques Boileau, the 10th baron, was arrested as a
Protestant, tortured, and, after an imprisonment of ten and one-half
years, died in the prison of St. Jean de Vedas, one mile from
Montpellier, a noble martyr for the Protestant faith, having been
beheaded by order of the Duke de Nemours. His son, Charles Boileau, then
a youth, having taken refuge in England and having entered the British
Army, firm to his Protestant faith, formally renounced his rights and
titles to the honours and estates of the family which thereby devolved
on his younger brother Maurice, who became the eleventh Baron Boileau.
From that time the barony fell into the hands of the junior and Roman
Catholic branch of the family of which the present Baron Boileau de
Castleneau is now the representative. He holds, too, the ancient château
de Castleneau, six miles from Nimes, which has been for three and a half
centuries in the family to which it gives the present title of the
barony. Five of the Barons de Castleneau held in succession the office
of Royal Treasurer. Charles Boileau died in 1733, leaving three children
who had issue, whose grandchildren and more remote issue are now living
to the number of six hundred and fifty. The Right Rev. Bishop Ussher,
when a child, was sent from under the jurisdiction of a governess at a
very early age. At Delgany College, in the county Wicklow, the Rev. Dr.
Daniel Flyns, of Harcourt street, Dublin, and the Rugby of Ireland, the
Rev. Dr. Stackpools, of Kingstown, he received his education as a youth.
As a lad he was older than his years and sought the company of those
much his seniors, showing a decided _penchant_ for those given to study.
Thrown chiefly amongst medical students he followed the course of study
so closely with one companion, that he was almost as well fitted as he
to pass the examinations. At a little over sixteen years he secured the
diploma of the Royal Dublin Society, taking sixth place out of
seventy-three candidates. Owing to heavy financial losses, through the
dishonesty of associates, the father of young Ussher was unable to
permit him to continue his studies and the determination was formed to
visit the United States. The resolve was put into execution, and, in the
city of New York, mercantile life was entered upon; successful, though
not in harmony with it, it was abandoned after a year, and a visit
undertaken to Washington, where several of the United States’ army
hospitals were visited; the old medical love rekindled and much
practical knowledge gained in the treatment of surgical diseases and
gun-shot wounds. The resolve was then formed to adopt medicine as a
profession, and after pursuing his medical studies in the University of
Michigan, he finally received the degree of Doctor of Medicine in
Illinois, became a member of the State Medical Association, and was
ultimately elected a member of the National Eclectic Medical
Association. As a practitioner he was most successful, and as a citizen
highly esteemed in the city of Aurora, Illinois, where he practised for
over ten years. He was vigorously identified with the welfare of the
community, and at one time it seemed that he would enter into political
life, being offered the nomination by the Democratic party as a
candidate for the legislature. Politics, however, were too impure to
have any permanent attraction for him, and he devoted himself to his
professional duties and the interests of the Anglican Church, of which
he was a member. Set thinking by a sermon preached by the well-known
evangelist, Mr. Moody, the instructions of pious parents were revived,
and earnest Christian work entered upon with marked evidence of the
divine favour. Under the license of the Right Rev. Dr. Whitehouse, then
bishop of Illinois, he kept alive several mission fields and taught a
large Bible-class with great acceptability. It was then pressed upon him
that he should enter the ministry of the Anglican Church in the Diocese
of Illinois. Steadily the conviction of the need of entire consecration
to God’s service deepened; it was fought back, but the urging of Bishop
Whitehouse was strong, and as there was then little evidence of the
sacerdotalism that subsequently manifested itself, the course of study
was entered upon under the bishop’s direction. In time it became
apparent that the bishop of Illinois held strong High Church views. He
was a guest in Dr. Ussher’s house on the evening of the day of the
publication of Bishop Tozer’s letter condemning Bishop Cummins of
Kentucky, for partaking of and administering the communion of the Lord’s
Supper with Dr. John Hall, Drs. Arnot and Dorner, of the Presbyterian
church, and reading it with a sense of indignation, he (Dr. Ussher)
asked Bishop Whitehouse what he thought of such a letter, to which
Bishop Whitehouse replied in cold, severe tones, “I think Bishop Tozer
is perfectly right, and Bishop Cummins deserves the severest
condemnation.” Those words decided the mind of Dr. Ussher, and realizing
that as an Evangelical Protestant Churchman, he would be out of sympathy
with Bishop Whitehouse, he determined to abandon the idea of entering
the Anglican ministry. He felt, however, that his heart was so bound up
in the Episcopal Church, and his love for her liturgy was so great, that
he could not be at home in any other branch of Christ’s Church. At this
juncture the Right Rev. Bishop Cummins, D.D., took steps to organize the
Reformed Episcopal Church, which being made public, proved the open
door. Under the guidance of that distinguished Protestant prelate, he
pursued his studies and was ordained deacon in the city of Chicago, by
the Right Rev. Bishop Cheney, in Christ Church, June 9th, 1874, and
presbyter, July 16th, 1876, in Emmanuel Church, Ottawa, Ontario, by
Bishops Cheney, Nicholson, Cridge and Fallows. His pastorates in Canada
have been, one of three years in Toronto, during which was built the
church on the corner of Simcoe and Caer Howell streets, and his present
charge in St. Bartholomew’s, Montreal, over which he has been pastor
since 1878. For good and sufficient reasons he and his congregation
withdrew from the jurisdiction of the Reformed Episcopal Church in the
United States and united with the English branch of the Reformed
Episcopal Church under the Right Rev. T. H. Gregg, M.D., D.D., otherwise
called the Reformed Church of England. By the General Synod in England,
in the following year, the Rev. Dr. Ussher was elected to the
episcopate, but declined. Two years after he was elected again, the
Canadian Synod electing him as their bishop, and in 1882, on the 19th
day of June, he was consecrated in Trinity Church, Southend, by the
Right Rev. Bishop Gregg, and seven presbyters, as “a bishop in the
Church of God.” Returning to Canada he took charge of the Diocese of
Canada and Newfoundland. The bishop believing in benevolent societies as
handmaids to the church, has been a member of the Order of Oddfellows
since 1865, and has held the office of Grand Master of the Province of
Quebec; he has also been, and is at present, a member of the Order of
Knights of Pythias, in which he holds the rank of Past Grand Chancellor,
and has had the honour of being Supreme Representative for the State of
Illinois, and the authorship of one of the degrees in use by the order.
Bishop Ussher is a graceful and forcible writer and an eloquent speaker,
and poet of acknowledged merit. In his religious views he is an old-time
Evangelical believer, pronounced in his Protestant views, in fact, a
_keeper in the old paths_, for which reason he is ecclesiastically where
he is to-day. On the 16th day of July, 1867, he was married by the Rev.
Dr. Kelly, in the city of Chicago, to Elizabeth Leonora Thompson, third
daughter of the Rev. Skeffington Thompson, of Broomfield, near Lucan, in
the county of Dublin, Ireland, and Elizabeth Margaret D’Arcy. The father
of Mrs. Ussher, the Rev. Skeffington Thompson, is the thirteenth child
of the late Skeffington Thompson, of Rathnally, county of Meath, by Anna
Maria Carter, only child and heiress of Thomas Carter, of Rathnally,
county Meath. Skeffington Thompson the elder was an unsuccessful
candidate in the last Irish Parliament against the Duke of Wellington
for the borough of Trim, both candidates being neighbours in the same
county, Dangan Castle, the Wellesley seat, being near Trim. The family
of Thompson, according to Burke, descended from the Thompsons of Barton,
Cumberland, a branch of which settled about the 16th century in the
county of Hertford, England. The Irish branch are descended from those
who crossed over to Ulster when that province was first taken in hand by
King James, and engaging in the prosperous linen trade made large
fortunes. Mrs. Ussher’s family history on the male side is interesting,
as leading back to the famous Thomas Carter, who took so active a part
in the Irish revolution, ending with the battle of the Boyne, 1690. This
Thomas Carter was sergeant-at-arms, a partisan of King William III. at
the siege of Derry, and battle of the Boyne. He was, as Burke, Ulster
King of Arms, says “_a gentleman whose services to his country at the
revolution were very considerable, for he not only served King William
at the battle of the Boyne (July 1st, 1690), but secured divers useful
books and writings belonging to King James and his secretaries_.” These
documents he secreted in the vaults of Christ’s Church Cathedral,
Dublin, until after the disturbances. He married for his second wife,
the Countess of Roscommon, widow of Wentworth Dillon, the poet, who was
publicly buried in Westminster Abbey. By her he had no family, but his
only son Thomas became Master of the Irish Rolls, for twenty-four years,
Privy Councillor, and Secretary of State. This Right Hon. Thomas Carter
had two sons and three daughters, from the eldest of whom Mrs. Ussher is
descended. The eldest sister of this Thomas Carter married Doctor Philip
Twysden, bishop of Raphoe, and son of Sir William Twysden, baronet, of
Roydon Hall, Kent. The issue of this marriage, Frances, married George
Bussey, fourth Earl of Jersey and first cousin to Anna Maria Carter,
Mrs. Ussher’s grandmother. This latter alliance resulted in the birth of
two sons and six daughters, her eldest son being George, fifth Earl of
Jersey, and the daughters became Ladies William Russell, Ann Lambton,
Sarah Bailey, Lady Ponsonby, Lady Henrietta, who married the bishop of
Oxford, and Lady Anglesey, wife of the Marquis of Anglesey, a hero of
Waterloo, and for her second husband the Duke of Argyll, which Duchess
of Argyll was cousin german to Mrs. Skeffington Thompson, Mrs. Ussher’s
paternal grandmother. The Right Hon. Thomas Carter’s second daughter,
Susan, married Thomas Carter, of Duleek Park and Castle, county Louth,
and her grand-daughter, Elizabeth, became Marchioness of Thomond by
entering the family of William O’Bryen, descendant from Brien Boroimhe,
King of Ireland, and whose line was continued by the King of Munster and
of Thomond to the reign of Henry VIII., King of England (see Sharpe’s
Peerage). Mrs. Ussher’s family history on the female side is even more
interesting. Her mother was Elizabeth Margaret, eldest daughter of the
Rev. Joshua D’Arcy, Rector of Lacka, county Kildare. This D’Arcy family
came to Ireland early in the 14th century and settled at Platten in the
county Meath. In a book “Maynooth Castle,” written by the present Duke
of Leinster when Marquis of Kildare, on page 5, we read, “Sir John
D’Arcy, Lord Justice of Ireland, married the Countess Johanna de Burgh,
daughter to the Red Earl of Ulster, and sister to Ellen, wife of Robert
Bruce, King of Scotland. They had a son, William, born at Maynooth, in
1330, from whom the present family of D’Arcy are lineally descended, and
are represented by George James Norman D’Arcy, of Hyde Park, county
Westmeath (see Burke’s “Landed Gentry”, also Walford’s “County
Families”), the worthy head of both English and Irish families and
representative of twenty-eight peerages of Great Britain.” The Irish
D’Arcys were governors of Ireland in the reign of the three Edwards,
with extraordinary privileges, the power to appoint a deputy, which as
Fynes Thompson remarks, neither before nor after was granted to any but
some few of the royal blood (and which he exercised on two several
occasions). A descendant, Sir William D’Arcy of Platten (or Platyn) was
the person who carried Lambert Simnel on his shoulders through Dublin
after he had been crowned in Christ Church Cathedral, for which he was
obliged to do homage to his viceroy, in 1488. This Sir William D’Arcy’s
descendant, Vice-Treasurer of Ireland, in 1523, was the author of a work
entitled, “The Decay of Ireland and the causes of it,” the MS. of which
is now in the library of Trinity College, Dublin. It is quite beyond the
limit of this sketch to give a full history of a family dating back to
their ancient seat in Arcques, in Normandy, whence they came to England
with the Conqueror, into whose family they had married previously—then
settled in Lincolnshire and are given _in extenso_ in Burke’s “Extinct
Peerages.” The Yorkshire histories contain a full pedigree of about
twenty-five generations, and the English and Irish pedigree illuminated
by Camden, the historian, and author of the “Brittania,” dating from
1066 to 1617, is in the possession of the present head of the D’Arcy
house, Mrs. Ussher’s cousin. This history says, that Nicholas D’Arcy, of
Platyn, espoused the cause of King James II., and was a captain in his
army. He was consequently attained in 1690, and his estates were
forfeited and sold in 1691; his only son Christopher, dying unmarried,
George D’Arcy, the surviving lineal heir, male, succeeded to the family
headship. This George D’Arcy entertained James the Second in his Castle
of Dunmow the night after the battle of the Boyne, and King William was
his guest previous to the battle. King James in his hurried departure
next morning forgot his pistol which yet remains in the D’Arcy family.
It is related of him that on the occasion he repeated the following
couplet:

        “Who will be king I do not know,
         But I’ll be D’Arcy of Dunmow.”

He was declared an innocent Papist in 1693, and died in full possession
of his estates in Meath and Westmeath, in 1718. His descendant John
D’Arcy, born 1700, married, 1727, and was the first of the family to
conform to the Protestant faith, which took place before his marriage
with Miss Judge, of Grangebey, county Westmeath. He died in 1785,
leaving four sons, Judge, Francis, Arthur, and James. Francis D’Arcy, on
the death of his brother, Judge D’Arcy, became heir male of Sir William
D’Arcy, of Platyn, second son of Lord D’Arcy, viceroy of Ireland. On the
death of Robert D’Arcy, fourth Earl of Holderness, in Yorkshire, 1778,
heir male of John D’Arcy and Norman D’Arcy. Francis D’Arcy died in 1813,
without issue, and his youngest brother James D’Arcy, who alone had sons
and daughters, thus continued the line—his eldest son, John, claimed
the older D’Arcy baronies, held by the last Earl of Holderness, and this
claim after trial was established. But it appears that as Robert D’Arcy,
fourth Earl of Holderness, left an only child, Lady Amelia, who married
the Marquis of Carmarthan, afterwards fifth Duke of Leeds, thus carrying
off the Yorkshire estates into the Osborn family, the title has not been
resumed by the present family. James D’Arcy, born in 1740, had three
sons, John, born 1767, Joshua, the grandfather of Mrs. Ussher, and
Thomas, who was a major in the army, and at his death, Inspector General
of Police, in Ulster. It is interesting to know that the marriage of
Lady Amelia D’Arcy, Baroness Conyers in her own right, was dissolved by
Act of Parliament in May, 1779, after the birth of three children, and
both parties remarried the following year, the Lady Amelia marrying John
Byron, father of the poet, Lord Byron (she died January 20th, 1784,
Dodd’s Peerage, Genealogical Volume and Plates of Arms, page 5). The
foregoing is a very condensed account, necessarily, of Mrs. Ussher’s
family history. A more extended history involving, as it would, the
introduction of many other distinguished families in every department of
the state, and covering many professions, literary, scientific, military
and naval, we must ask our readers to spare us. Reference to the usual
standard histories, genealogies and heralds of Great Britain, would
confirm the above. It must be remembered that all the history of the
English D’Arcys, dating from 1066, their possession of thirty-three
baronies in Lincolnshire and Yorkshire, their active part with the other
barons in extracting Magna Charta from King John, their subsequent
prominent part in the state during every reign down to that of George
III., the _Pilgrimage of Grace_, these and many other matters have been
omitted, but what has been said will suffice to show whence we have
come, and we trust that the present and future will verify the wise
man’s saying (Prov. xvii, 6.) in the history of Mrs. Ussher, that if
“Children’s children are the crown of old men, the glory of children are
their father’s.” The following are the surviving children of Bishop and
Mrs. Ussher:—Sydney Lahmire Neville Ussher, Clarence Douglas Ussher,
Charles Edward Cheney Ussher, George Richard Beardmore Ussher, Elizabeth
Henrietta Ussher, Warwick Wellesley Ussher.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Bayard, William=, M.D., Edin., St. John, New Brunswick, was born in
Kentville, Nova Scotia, on the 21st day of August, 1814. The ancestors
of our subject were Huguenots, and directly connected with the family,
represented by the famous knight, “sans peur et sans reproche,” whose
coat of arms is carried by them to this day. Having been driven from
France, they landed in New Amsterdam, now New York, in the month of May,
1647. There were three brothers, Petrus, Balthazer and Nicholas; one
remained in New York, and became one of the most prominent men in that
city; one went to Baltimore and his branch gave senators to that city
for the last hundred years, among them the present United States
Secretary; and the other one went to England, giving numerous soldiers
of distinction to that country, among them Colonel Samuel Vetch Bayard
and Colonel John Bayard, brothers. Colonel Samuel Vetch Bayard had three
sons; one a captain in the army, was killed at the battle of Waterloo;
one a captain in the English navy, was murdered at Fordham, near New
York city; and the third son, Robert, the father of our subject, was a
lieutenant in the British army at the age of thirteen years, and was
allowed to proceed with his studies at Windsor, Nova Scotia, while his
father’s regiment was stationed at Halifax, N.S. He left the army and
graduated in medicine at the University of Edinburgh in 1809, was a D.
C. L. of Windsor College, N.S., and for three years professor of
Obstetrics in the University of New York. When the war of 1812 was
declared against Great Britain, he was required to take the oath of
allegiance or leave the country. He chose the latter course, found his
way to Portland, Maine, left that city in an open boat, and arrived in
the city of St. John, N.B., in the month of May, 1813. From that city he
went to Halifax, N.S., and there married Frances Catherine Robertson,
daughter of Commissary Robertson, who was killed in the Colonial war
which commenced in 1775. Her grandfather was Colonel John Billop, who
owned a large part of Staten Island, near New York, and being a
Loyalist, his property was confiscated. He died in the city of St. John.
Dr. Robert Bayard practised his profession in Kentville, N.S., for
several years, and in 1824 removed to St. John, N.B., where he died in
June, 1868 at the advanced age of eighty-one years. He stood at the head
of his profession, and was a fluent speaker and an able writer. His son,
Dr. W. Bayard, when twelve years of age, was sent to a popular
educational institution, conducted by the Rev. William Powell, at
Fordham, near New York city, where he remained five years. He then
entered as a private student with Dr. Valentine Mott, the eminent
surgeon of New York, at the same time attending the medical lectures at
the College. While in Dr. Mott’s office he took high honours for
proficiency in anatomy. The next year he matriculated at the University
of Edinburgh, from which institution he received the degree of doctor in
medicine in 1837. He then walked the hospitals in Paris, and visited
many in Germany, and on returning to St. John, practised in company with
his father. He has since that time frequently visited the hospitals in
England, France and Germany. “His reputation for skill has,” says a
writer who has noted this gentleman’s career “almost from the start,
stood high, and of his profession he has made a brilliant success. He
has been greatly honoured, alike by the medical fraternity and his
fellow citizens generally, and it is safe to say, that no man in his
profession, in the Province, is held in higher esteem. There is not a
city or large town in the Province of New Brunswick, Nova Scotia or
Prince Edward Island, to which he has not been called upon professional
business.” It may be said that the general public hospital in the city
of St. John owes its existence to the energy and perseverance of Dr.
Bayard. Prior to 1858 he brought the subject prominently before the
authorities, but no action was taken. He then endeavoured to obtain
money to build one by subscription, but finding that many of the most
wealthy men in the city refused to subscribe, he abandoned the idea, and
employed and paid a lawyer to draft an Act to assess the community for
the purpose. This bill he placed before the Legislature of the Province,
and with the assistance of Sir Leonard Tilley, Judge the Hon. John H.
Gray and other members of the House, got the bill passed granting power
to raise the funds required for the building, and the support of it. He
has been President of the Board of Commissioners since its establishment
in 1860. He is chairman of the Board of Health for the city and county
of St. John, having been appointed by the Government in 1855 to carry
out the Sanitary Act passed in that year. He was elected President of
the New Brunswick Medical Society for four years in succession,
resigning the situation in 1881. He was elected President of the Council
of Physicians and Surgeons of New Brunswick in 1881, and resigned the
situation in 1885, not feeling justified in assuming the responsibility
of carrying out the Act, the Legislature having declined to pass
amendments to it required. He was appointed Coroner for the city and
county of St. John in 1839, resigning the situation in 1867. During his
tenure of office, there was but one coroner, now there are six with very
small increase of population. The above situations were unsolicited. Dr.
Bayard was at one time the New Brunswick editor of the _Montreal Medical
and Surgical Journal_, in which many interesting articles from his pen
may be found. The arduous duties of his profession compelled him to give
up the work. “He is regarded as a high authority on any branch of
medical science which he sees fit to discuss.” His address to the
Medical Society upon the “use and abuse of alcoholic drinks,” and his
lecture at the Mechanics’ Institute in St. John upon the “Progress of
Medicine, Surgery and Hygiene during the last one hundred years,” has
received high commendation. His politics are liberal-conservative. He is
a member of Trinity Episcopal church, and an exemplary man in all the
walks of life. The wife of Dr. Bayard was Susan Maria Wilson, daughter
of John Wilson, Esq., of Chamcook, near St. Andrew’s, in his day a large
ship owner and merchant, and one of the most enterprising men in the
county. It may be said that the St. Andrew’s and Woodstock railway owes
its origin to his energy. It was from him that Dr. Bayard received the
first telegram ever sent to St. John, as follows:—“To Dr. W. Bayard,
April 30th, 1851. Being the first subscriber to the Electric Telegraph
Company, I am honoured by the first communication to your city,
announcing this great and wonderful work God has made known to man, by
giving him control of his lightning. Signed, John Wilson.” Dr. Bayard
was married in the year 1844, and his wife died in the year 1876,
leaving no children. She was a woman of ability and fine social
qualities, always happiest when she had a house full of friends, and was
a splendid entertainer. She had wonderful energy as shown in attending
to the details of domestic life, in looking after the poor and
unfortunate, and in visiting the Home for Aged Women, the Protestant
Orphan Asylum, etc., etc. She was truly an angel of mercy, and her death
was nothing short of a calamity to the city. Dr. Bayard has not again
married.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Stevens, Rev. Lorenzo Gorham=, A.M., B.D., Portland, St. John, was born
in Bedford, Mass., U.S.A., on 26th December, 1846, and is the eldest son
of Lorenzo Dow Stevens and Mary Gorham Parsons Stevens. His grandparents
on his father’s side were Abel Stevens, whose nephew, Abel Stevens,
D.D., LL.D., is one of the leading divines of the Methodist Episcopal
church in the United States; and Hadassa Mills, whose brother, Luther
Mills, was a distinguished graduate of Harvard University, in the class
of 1792. His father’s cousin, Edward Lewis Stevens, a graduate of
Harvard, of the class of 1863, and afterwards first lieutenant in the
44th Mass. Volunteer Militia, was killed at Boykin’s Mills, near Camden,
S.C., April 18th, 1865. His grandfather on his mother’s side was Wilhelm
Edlund, ship owner and merchant, born in Stockholm, Sweden. The brother
of this gentleman was private secretary to Gustavus III. His grandfather
left no male issue, and the name, so far as can be learned, is now
extinct in America. His grandmother, on his mother’s side, was Abigail
Hodges, daughter of Abigail Davis, who was cousin of Chief Justice
Parsons, of Massachusetts, and whose brother, Aaron Davis, served at the
battle of Bunker Hill, under Gen. Warren, and received a musket ball in
his thigh at the time. His mother’s grandfather, Joseph Davis, after the
early death of his wife Abigail, married Christina Greene, niece of Gen.
Greene, one of the Division Commanders under Gen. Washington. After
leaving the Francis St. grammar school, Boston, Lorenzo Gorham Stevens
entered the (Roxbury) Latin School, professor Buck, principal, where he
remained five years, graduating July, 1865. He then entered Harvard
University, and remained four years, graduating in the class of 1869.
His favourite studies in the college were the languages, history and
mental and moral philosophy. The year following his graduation he was
principal of the English department of the German-American School, in
Morrisania, New York. In September, 1870, he entered the Episcopal
Theological Seminary, Cambridge, Mass., and remained one year. The years
1872 and 1873 he spent in foreign travel, at the same time prosecuting
his theological studies. While in Berlin he attended at the University
the lectures of the celebrated Dr. Dörner. Mr. Stevens travelled as far
east as St. Petersburg, and as far north as Upsala, Sweden. After a most
enjoyable tour in which sight-seeing and study were about equally
combined, he returned to the Cambridge Seminary, and graduated June,
1874. His diaconate he spent in Massachusetts, preaching in several
places. In September, 1875, he became rector of Trinity Church, St.
Stephen, N.B., and in January of the following year, was admitted to the
order of priesthood in the cathedral, Fredericton, by Bishop Medley, now
Metropolitan. He served as rector of Trinity church three years. On
November, 1878, he entered upon the rectorship of St. Luke’s church,
Portland, St. John, a position he still holds. Rev. Mr. Stevens was
chaplain of the Sussex Lodge, F. and A. M. (St. Stephen), and has acted
as chaplain for other lodges at various times. On August, 30, 1881 he
was married to Susan Lynds, only surviving child of Dr. John Waddell,
superintendent for twenty-seven years of the Provincial Lunatic Asylum,
St. John. (A sketch of his life will be found elsewhere in this book.)
Of this marriage two children have been born, Henry Waddell, March 24,
1883, and Edlund Archibald, August 23, 1885.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Klotz, Otto=, Preston, Ontario, is a native of Germany, having been
born in the city of Kiel, on the shores of the Baltic sea, on the 25th
of November, 1817. His father, Jacob Klotz, was the junior of the firm
of Klotz & Son of that place. After the death of the senior member, the
firm was continued for many years, first by Jacob Klotz, and
subsequently by his younger brother, Christian Klotz, their business
being chiefly the purchase of grain and shipping it to England. Otto
Klotz received his primary education at a public school in his native
place, but was subsequently educated in Luebeck; after having passed his
final examination creditably, he was confirmed in conformity with the
rites of the Lutheran Church at Kiel, and thereupon apprenticed to a
wine merchant in Luebeck, where, in addition to his mother-tongue, he
had ample opportunity of making use of French and English, which
languages he had by this time fairly mastered. At the expiration of his
apprenticeship, he returned home. In the spring of 1837, his uncle,
Christian Klotz, under the old firm of Klotz & Son, sent on speculation
a cargo of wheat to America (the crops having failed in 1836), and young
Otto Klotz was permitted to make a trip to the new world in his uncle’s
brig, laden with wheat. The requisite arrangements for that voyage were
soon made, and since neither himself nor his relations and friends
considered the departure as being of long duration, but rather a
pleasure trip, the farewell at the wharf was neither gloomy nor sombre,
although his father had advised him to inquire for a good situation, and
if found to stay for a few years, and then return with a good store of
general knowledge, as many young men of the town had done before him. On
the 27th of March, 1837, the anchor was weighed, the sails set, and the
_Friedericke_, heavily laden with wheat, sailed out of Kiel harbour with
young Klotz on board. The voyage was completed in seventy-nine long
days, and on the 14th of June, anchor was cast in the East River, at New
York. On arrival it was found that the wheat was heated, and the market
overstocked, hence the speculation was a failure. Otto Klotz found to
his regret that owing to great depression in business and the numerous
failures, he could not procure a situation in New York. He visited
Newark, New Jersey, and there met a German farmer from Canada, who
proposed to him the taking up of wild land and going into farming. The
novelty of this proposal appeared to have some charm and was really
entered upon. Writing to his father informing him of his resolution, he
handed the letter to the captain of his uncle’s brig, bade him farewell,
and left for Canada. Arrived in the township of McKillop, in the Huron
Tract, he endeavoured to learn what was required in order to become a
successful farmer, and soon ascertained that for a young man standing
alone without relations or friends and without any knowledge of farming,
it would be unwise to take up land and “roughing it in the bush;”
however he stayed about two months, during which time he acquired
considerable proficiency in the use of the axe, helping to chop and put
up log houses in the neighbourhood. He left McKillop in October, 1837,
and went to Preston, which place was then all alive with new settlers
from Germany. He engaged for some time as clerk in a store, and thinking
he saw a good opportunity, he started in business on his own account in
February, 1838, using his father’s letter of credit in the purchase of
his first stock of goods. In 1839, he married the daughter of a farmer
of the township of Wilmot. This marriage proved to be a happy one, his
good wife being an excellent helpmate, a good housewife, a dutiful
mother and an exemplary spouse. Shortly after young Klotz had settled in
Preston, he became acquainted with an old English gentleman, William
Scollick, who was a surveyor, conveyancer and a commissioner of the
Court of Request, and who took a particular fancy to him and his
penmanship. He advised him to learn conveyancing, and promised to
instruct him therein. This kind offer was readily accepted; the pupil
employed his spare moments in studying to perfect himself, became an apt
scholar, and after the death of old Mr. Scollick, became his successor
as conveyancer, a business which proved no mean help for improving his
pecuniary circumstances. Mr. Klotz was made a naturalized British
subject in 1844, was appointed a notary public in 1846, a commissioner
for taking affidavits in 1848, a clerk of the Division Court in 1848,
and a justice of the peace in 1853. For a long term of years, he was
director of the County Agricultural Society, and once its president. Of
the Preston Mechanics’ Institute and Horticultural Society he has been
president from the establishment of the same. Of the Executive Committee
of the Association of Mechanics’ Institutes for Ontario, he was a member
for twelve years, during six of which its vice-president and for two
years its president, and by virtue of these offices a member of the
Agricultural Council of Ontario. But the office which he has occupied
longest and in which he has worked with greater energy than in any
other, is that of School Trustee. When in 1841, the Public Schools Act
became law, he was elected one of the School Commissioners in the
township (the title was subsequently changed to School Trustee); at the
expiration of his term he was re-elected, and has been so re-elected
ever since. A good stone school building with a teacher as good as in
those days could be obtained was the result of his early work in the
cause of education. He next succeeded in getting permission from the
District Council to have all property in the Preston school section
taxed for a free school, and that school has been free ever since,
although in former years it was optional with the rate-payers whether
their school should be free or supported by a rate bill per pupil
attending school. After Preston became incorporated, he was appointed
local superintendent of schools, and in that capacity he was seventeen
years a member of the County Board of Examiners of Teachers. The
scarcity of good teachers was often severely felt, while at present they
are plentiful, and Mr. Klotz obtained permission for German teachers to
be examined in German, and he had charge of preparing the questions for
such examinations. At the insistance of several teachers, he prepared
and published a German grammar for use of German pupils and others
studying German. In 1853, he agitated a public examination of all the
schools in the county; in this move he was ably assisted by the late Dr.
Scott, who was then the warden of the county. The county council granted
$100 for the purchase of prizes to be distributed among the successful
competitors, and appointed Mr. Klotz to make the requisite arrangements,
which were successfully carried out. In 1865, Mr. Klotz, assisted by two
of the teachers of the Preston school, prepared an _exposé_ of “The
Irish National Readers,” which at that time were the authorized readers
for the common schools. In that _exposé_ the writer criticised the
spelling, grammatical construction, historical blunders, unsuitable
words and expressions for children, unfitness of the books for Canadian
schools, and the entire absence therein of any article which might tend
to cultivate in the minds of the pupils a patriotic feeling. A lengthy
and animated correspondence between the chief superintendent, the Rev.
Dr. Ryerson, and Mr. Klotz was the result; but notwithstanding the same,
Mr. Klotz had the gratification of seeing “The Irish National Readers”
superseded by a Canadian series of Readers. As president of the
Mechanics’ Institute, Mr. Klotz has been indefatigable in providing for
the inhabitants of Preston and neighbourhood a large library of well
selected books, numbering in 1886 4,000 volumes, of which 2,800 are
English, and 1,200 German. In politics Mr. Klotz commenced as early as
1838, then hardly a year in Canada, to take an active part, having been
required to shoulder a gun and to stand guard at the Grand River bridge,
upon a report that a band of rebels under lead of one Duncan, was coming
from London to invade Waterloo, which, however, afterwards proved a
false report. He concluded that if, though yet an alien, he was required
to risk his life in defence of Canada, he would claim it as a right to
speak and vote upon political questions. Shortly after the Earl of
Durham’s Report had been published, mass meetings were held in several
parts of Upper Canada to discuss the same; and Mr. Klotz was one of
thirty-six men, mostly old settlers of Waterloo county, who by
hand-bills called a public meeting to be held at Preston, on the 10th
day of August, “to take into consideration the deplorable state of the
province of Upper Canada, and to express their opinion thereon, in
concurrence with the great county meeting lately held at Dundas, upon
the glorious report of the Earl of Durham.” One of those handbills is
still preserved by Mr. Klotz as a relic of his younger days. The first
parliamentary election which came on was held at Guelph, and Mr. Klotz
went there to vote. A scrutineer, the late Colonel Hodgins, asked him:
“How long are you in this country, sir?” The answer was given with
firmness: “Not quite ten years, sir;” the response was: “Oh, that will
do; for whom do you vote?” “for Mr. James Durand, sir,” said Mr. Klotz
and left the polling place. Mr. Durand was afterwards declared elected.
After responsible government had been granted to the people of Canada,
and the political party which adopted the name “Conservatives” had been
formed, Mr. Klotz joined that party, and he has ever since supported it
with all his energy. He held for a number of years the office of
secretary of that party in his electoral division, and in later years
that of president of the same. For the celebration of the Peace Jubilee,
held at the county town, Berlin, shortly after the Franco-German war, he
was elected president of the German societies, and as such he delivered
on May 2nd, 1871, in front of the Court House, to an audience of several
thousands, the Peace Jubilee address; and subsequently at the town of
Waterloo, on the occasion of the first “German Saenger Fest” in Ontario,
being held there, he delivered to an overcrowded house at the
Agricultural Hall, the address in German and also in English. The old
Alien Act requiring a residence of seven years before a foreigner could
become a naturalized subject, was felt by many Germans to be too long a
period of probation, especially since it only required five years’
residence in the United States to become a citizen there. Accordingly
Mr. Klotz agitated the matter through the medium of the public press,
and by letters to members of Parliament and to the government. In this
he was ably assisted by other Germans, and their united efforts were
crowned with success, the seven years being first reduced to five, and
later to three years’ residence. An attempt was made by him to induce
the British government to extend the privileges of a person naturalized
in Canada, over the whole British empire; but in this attempt he failed,
although his arguments upon that subject had been kindly forwarded to
the British government, by His Excellency the Governor-General. It
appeared that the reasons for refusal were not on account of Canada, but
of such of the numerous British possessions which still number among its
inhabitants a large body of semi-civilized peoples, through whom serious
difficulties might arise, if such colonies were also to apply and obtain
the like privileges which were asked for Canada. Among the Masonic
fraternity, the name of Otto Klotz has become a household word. He
became a member of the same in 1846, and has ever since been an active
and energetic worker of the Mystic tie. He is an old member of the Grand
Lodge and served without interruption as a member of the Board of
General Purposes since 1864. He made the subject of Benevolence his
special study, and the present system of distributing aid, and of
regulating grants is his work; in acknowledgment of which, the Grand
Lodge presented him in 1873 with a handsome testimonial. He continued
his noble work with unabated energy, adding from time to time
improvements suggested by experience, and in 1885, after twenty-one
consecutive years as chairman of the Committee on Benevolence, the Grand
Lodge conferred upon him the highest honour, by unanimously electing him
a Past Grand Master, and voting for the purchase of a handsome and
costly Grand Master’s regalia, which, with an elaborate address
beautifully engraved, were presented to him at a later day at his mother
lodge, the old Barton, No. 6, in the city of Hamilton, in presence of
one of the largest gatherings of the fraternity ever assembled there.
Besides this great honour conferred upon him, and the many fraternal
greetings and tributes paid him on that occasion by the brethren
assembled, he had the additional pleasure of the presence of three of
his sons, two of whom as Past Masters of Preston lodge, and the youngest
as Master of the Lodge of Strict Observance, in Hamilton; and the
gratification of a most cordial and fraternal reception of them by the
brethren assembled, as worthy sons of a worthy father. The family of Mr.
Klotz and his good wife consists of four sons and two daughters, of whom
three sons and one daughter are married and have families, while the
eldest son and youngest daughter have remained single. They are all
living in comfortable circumstances, highly respected by all who know
them, and the just pride of their aged parents. A family gathering which
occurs once a year is always accompanied by those genuine pleasures
which are in store for a happy family in which strife and bickerings are
unknown quantities. At one of these gatherings the unanimous wish of Mr.
Klotz’s children was expressed that he should retire from business, and
spend with his good wife the remaining years of his life in rest and
comfort. Arrangements were made accordingly, and in 1881, he retired
from business, since which time he has been living on his income, with
his wife and unmarried daughter in a commodious dwelling, enjoying that
repose and comfort which is the just reward of honest industry.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Waddell, John=, M.D. The late Dr. Waddell, of St. John, New Brunswick,
was the son of the Rev. John Waddell, a native of Shotts, Scotland. The
latter was educated at Glasgow, and came to Nova Scotia in 1797, and
became pastor of the Presbyterian church of Truro. He was married in
1802 to a daughter of Jotham Blanchard (a loyalist from Massachusetts,
and a colonel in one of the loyalist regiments). The Rev. Mr. Waddell
officiated on the occasion of the opening of the old St. Andrew’s Kirk,
in St. John, N.B. (destroyed by the great fire), having delivered the
first sermon in the church in which his son, the subject of this sketch,
fifty years afterwards became a prominent and influential elder. Dr.
Waddell was born in Truro, Nova Scotia, on the 17th of March, 1810. When
quite a boy, his mother died. After attending the Grammar school at
Truro, kept by Mr. James Irving, he entered the Pictou Academy, under
the presidency of Dr. McCulloch (the able Biblical controversialist,
whose discussions with Bishop Burke, of Halifax, made his name famous
throughout Nova Scotia). After leaving the academy, he went into
mercantile business in his native town, and so continued until the
autumn of 1833, when he commenced the study of medicine under Dr. Lynds.
He next proceeded to Glasgow, Scotland, where he pursued his studies
with untiring assiduity, and received his diploma, October 18th, 1839,
from the Royal College of Surgeons, London. He then went to Paris, and
continued there two years, attending the medical lectures given by some
of the most scientific men of the French capital. On his return to Nova
Scotia, in 1840, he commenced the practice of medicine in Truro. The
same year he married Susan, the only daughter of his first medical
teacher, Dr. Lynds. The following year she died. Five years afterwards
he married Jane Walker Blanchard, daughter of Edward Blanchard, of
Truro. In 1849, Dr. Waddell was appointed by His Excellency, Sir Edmund
Head, to the situation of medical superintendent of the New Brunswick
Lunatic Asylum, a position whose arduous and multifarious duties he
discharged with signal success, until his retirement in the spring of
1876, a period of twenty-seven years. When he took charge of the asylum,
at the age of thirty-nine, he was the very personification of vigorous
health. He was tall and finely proportioned. Humanly speaking there was
in him the promise of the attainment of a life of four score years and
more. He sprang from a long-lived race. His step was elastic and his
form erect; his mind was buoyant and full of love for the work he had
but just undertaken. By his kind and gentlemanly manner, he was
singularly capable of dealing with those unfortunates who required so
much of paternal care and solicitude. And yet, with this urbanity and
goodness, there was firmness of character, so much required by the rules
of discipline, which never failed to exact obedience, but it was the
obedience of a child to a parent. When Dr. Waddell assumed the duties of
his office, there were but eighty patients in the establishment, which
number gradually increased until the figures reached, at the time of his
retirement, three hundred, besides about fifty domestics. With every
successive year, from 1849, there was a steady increase of work—work of
the most sorrowful description—and with it a corresponding amount of
care, anxiety and responsibility. And yet, Dr. Waddell worked on, day
after day, in the same unwearied round for twenty-seven years, devoting
the flower of his days, his vigour, his manhood to a task which led
ultimately to the destruction of a once powerful constitution. At the
earnest request of his family—whose members had always been closely
knit and compacted together by the most tender cords of affection—he
retired from the asylum in the spring of 1876, under the expectation
that with rest and freedom from care and anxiety, he would be enabled to
take a new lease of life. But instead of that repose for which
retirement was sought, it was found that a change from an active to a
passive life was more than his shattered constitution could withstand.
The day he laid down his staff and turned his back upon the asylum he
loved so well and served so faithfully, that day Dr. Waddell’s work upon
earth was ended. Bowed down with the infirmities of a premature old age,
he lingered till August 29th, 1878, when he passed away at the age of
sixty-eight. Probably no man in the province of New Brunswick was better
or more generally known than Dr. Waddell, and there are few whose name
and works will be held in more grateful remembrance by its inhabitants.
His only surviving child, Susan Lynds (by his second marriage), was
married August 30th, 1881, to the Rev. Lorenzo Gorham Stevens, rector of
St. Luke’s Church, Portland, St. John, N.B., a sketch of whose life will
be found elsewhere.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=MacVicar, Rev. Malcolm=, Ph.D., LL.D., Professor of Apologetics and
Christian Ethics, McMaster Hall (Baptist College), Toronto, was born on
the 30th September, 1829, in Argyleshire, Scotland. His father, John
MacVicar, was a farmer in Dunglass, near Campbeltown, Kintyre, Scotland,
and was known as a man of great physical and intellectual vigour, and
was well known in his native Scotland and the land of his adoption,
Canada, for his ability, generosity and sterling integrity. His wife,
Janet MacTavish, possessed a similar character, and reached the age of
ninety-two years before she died, having seen her children’s children in
positions of usefulness and influence. Malcolm, the subject of this
sketch, was one of twelve children, and came with his parents to Canada
in 1835, and settled on a farm at Chatham, Ontario. His early years were
spent at first on a farm, then at Cleveland, Ohio, where he learned the
trade of ship carpenter. Being ambitious and anxious to get on, he
decided to secure an education, and along with his brother Donald, now
Principal of the Presbyterian College in Montreal, went to Toronto, in
1850, and entered Knox College to study for the Presbyterian Ministry,
where he remained for two years. In the meantime his views of doctrines
having undergone a change, he became connected with the Baptist
denomination, and turned his attention to teaching and fitting young men
for the Toronto University, preaching occasionally. He was ordained to
the Baptist Ministry in 1856. In 1858 he went to Rochester, New York
State, and entered the senior class at the University of Rochester,
taking his degree of B. A. the following summer. He immediately went to
Brockport, in the same county, where he became a member of the faculty
of the Brockport Collegiate Institute, then under the principalship of
Dr. David Barbank. Here, with the exception of one year spent in the
Central School at Buffalo, he remained until the spring of 1867 (when
that institution was transformed into a Normal School), first as
subordinate, then as associate principal, and from April, 1864, sole
principal of the school. He was a very successful teacher from the
first, being full of energy, and ambitious to devise new and improved
methods of illustrating and impressing the truth. Nor were the
class-room walls the limit of his intellectual horizon, but he was
constantly seeking some better plan of organizing the educational work
immediately in hand, and over the whole state. He was quickly recognized
by the regents of the University as one of the foremost teachers and
principals in the state. In August, 1865, he, by appointment, read a
paper before the convocation of that body on Internal Organization of
Academies, which looked towards and proved the first step towards
putting in practice regent’s examinations in the academies as a basis
for distribution of the income of the literary fund. He was shortly
afterwards appointed by the chancellor, chairman of a committee of
principals of academies to consider the practical workings and results
of the system of regent’s examinations just being instituted. During
these years of his connection with the Collegiate Institute, he took a
lively interest in the subject of the so-called normal training in
academies, and became convinced that the utmost that could be done for
teachers’ classes under the circumstances was too little to meet the
needs of the common schools of the state. He, therefore, with the advice
and cooperation of friends of education in Brockport and Rochester, and
the Hon. Victor M. Rice, then state superintendent, proposed to the
State Legislature, in 1865-66, a bill authorizing the establishment of a
Normal and Training School at Brockport, and offering to transfer the
Institute property to the state for that purpose on very liberal terms.
Subsequently this measure was so modified as to provide for four schools
instead of one, and to leave the location of them to a board consisting
of the governor, state superintendent and state officers and others. In
this form the bill became law. It now became necessary to adopt some
definite plan of organization for the new schools, and Superintendent
Rice at once turned to Professor MacVicar for assistance. The professor
submitted a plan, which, with some slight modifications, was adopted and
became the basis for the organization of all the schools under the law.
In consideration of the services rendered by Professor MacVicar and
other friends of the cause, the first school was located in Brockport,
with Professor MacVicar as its principal, and he immediately set to work
to organize this school, and opened it in the spring of 1867, having
among the members of his faculty, Professor Charles McLean, William J.
Milne and J. H. Hoose, now the Principals of the Normal schools of
Brockport, Genesee and Courtland. The first year of Normal school work,
carried on as it was in connection with planning and supervising the
erection of the new buildings, proved a very trying one to Principal
MacVicar, and his health giving way under the pressure, he resolved to
offer his resignation at the end of the school year of 1867-8. This he
accordingly did, but the state superintendent, preferring not to lose
him from the state, granted him a year’s leave of absence, instead of
accepting his resignation. He then took a trip west, during the summer
of 1868, and was invited to become superintendent of the schools of the
city of Leavenworth; after some consideration, he accepted this
position, and remained there until the following April, in the meantime
reorganizing the schools from bottom to top, a work that had been
neglected hitherto. His western trip having restored him to perfect
health, he returned to New York state, but thought it best not to again
take up his work at Brockport. A Normal School having been located in
Potsdam, St. Lawrence county, and about ready to open, he was invited to
become its principal, and accepted the office. He at once gathered
around him a corps of teachers, and opened his second Normal school,
three weeks after he left Leavenworth. The regents of the University
welcomed him back to the state, and expressed their estimation of his
ability by conferring upon him the degree of Doctor of Philosophy, in
the summer of 1869, and his _alma mater_ added an LL.D. the following
year. The school at Potsdam was no sooner organized than he gave himself
anew to the study of methods of instruction and the philosophy of
education, for which he possessed a peculiar aptitude. Being encouraged
by the other principals to work out his ideas into permanent shape for
the general good, he became the author of several books on arithmetic;
he also became the author and inventor of various important devices to
illustrate, objectively, principles of arithmetic, geography and
astronomy. Meanwhile there arose a degree of friction between the
academies and Normal schools of the state, which made itself felt in the
legislative session of 1876, in a threat to cut off the appropriations
from the Normal schools, unless the academies were treated more
liberally. At the next meeting of the Normal school principals, the
matter was discussed, and the cause of the difficulty was found to be
the double-headed management of their educational system. It was agreed
that the remedy for the existing difficulties was found in uniting the
management of all the schools of the state under one head. Dr. MacVicar
and Dr. Sheldon, of the Oswego Normal school, were appointed to urge
this view on the State Legislature at its next session. They conferred
with a deputation of academy principals, and won their approval of the
plan prepared. It was then embodied in a bill, and brought before the
legislature in 1877. Although much time was spent in bringing the matter
before the committees of the assembly and the senate, and many of the
prominent men of both houses, who generally approved of the measure, yet
the private interests of aspirants to the office of state
superintendents conflicted with it, and it was thrown out when it came
up for a hearing. In the autumn of 1880, Dr. MacVicar was invited to
take the principalship of the Michigan State Normal school, at
Ypsilanti, and finding it the only school of the kind in that state, and
there being no diversity of interest in the educational management of
the state, it seemed to offer an opportunity for something like ideal
Normal school work, so he accepted the position. He remained there,
however, but one year, when, being thoroughly worn out with hard work,
and being urgently pressed to join the faculty of the Toronto Baptist
College, just then opened, he resigned his position in Michigan and came
to Canada. Dr. MacVicar excels as a mathematician and metaphysician,
having read extensively in both directions, as well as in the natural
sciences. He has also made the relation of science and religion a
special study, and is now investigating the wide field of Christian
Apologetics. As a writer and in the classroom, he is characterized by
the utmost clearness and force, and his career as an educator has been
eminently successful. It has fallen to his lot to perform a vast amount
of hard work in all of which he has shown a spirit of self-sacrifice in
a remarkable degree, through which he has been the means of advancing
many others to positions of high trust and usefulness. His
investigations in the science of education are critical and original,
being based upon extensive observation and a large induction of facts.
Having for twenty-five years taught a wide range of subjects, and being
naturally possessed of strong and well trained logical powers, he is
well qualified to analyze the human mind and all that is concerned in
its proper education and harmonious development. To this work he now
devotes such time as can be spared from strictly professional duties. As
a theologian his views are definite and comprehensive, thoroughly
evangelical and uncompromisingly opposed to the materialistic pantheism,
and philosophical and scientific scepticism of the present day. On the
1st of January, 1865, Dr. MacVicar was married to Isabella McKay, of
Chatham, and has a family consisting of three sons and one daughter.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Heavysege, Charles=, the gifted author of “Saul,” was born in
Liverpool, England, May 2nd, 1816. On his arrival in Canada in 1853, he
took up his residence in Montreal, where for a time he worked as a
machinist, earning by hard labour a modest subsistence for himself and
his family. Afterwards he became a local reporter on the staff of the
Montreal _Daily Witness_; but, as has been the case with many another
son of genius, his life was one long struggle with poverty. Through all
his earlier years of toil and harassing cares, he devoted himself to
study and poetical composition, but published nothing till he was nearly
forty years of age. A poem in blank verse saw the light in 1854. This
production, crude, no doubt, and immature, met with a chilling
reception, even from his friends. Some time afterwards appeared a
collection of fifty sonnets, many of them vigorous and even lofty in
tone, but almost all of them defective in execution, owing to the
author’s want of early culture. “Saul,” his greatest work, was published
in 1857, and fortunately fell into the hands of Hawthorne, then a
resident of Liverpool, who had it favourably noticed in the _North
British Review_. Longfellow and Emerson, too, spoke highly of its
excellence, the former pronouncing it to be “the best tragedy written
since the days of Shakespeare.” Canadians then discovered that Heavysege
was a genius, and made partial atonement for their neglect; but even to
the end the poet’s struggle with fortune was a bitter one. In 1857, he
published “Saul: A scriptural tragedy.” “Count Flippo or, The Unequal
Marriage:” a drama in five acts (1860). This production is inferior to
“Saul,” not only because it does not possess the epic sublimity of the
sacred drama, but because in it there is too much straining after
effect, the characterization is defective, and the criticism of life
displayed is not of the highest quality. “Jephthah’s Daughter,” (1865):
a drama which follows closely the scriptural narrative, and, so far as
concerns artistic execution, is superior to “Saul.” The lines flow with
greater smoothness; there are fewer commonplace expressions, and the
author has gained a firmer mastery over the rhetorical aids of figures
of speech. His mind, however, shows no increase in strength, and we miss
the rugged grandeur and terrible delineations of his earliest drama.
“The Advocate:” a novel (1865). Besides these works, Heavysege produced
many shorter pieces, one of the finest of which, “The Dark Huntsman,”
was sent to the _Canadian Monthly_ just before his death. To Art
Heavysege, so his critics say, owed little. Even his most elaborate
productions are defaced by unmusical lines, prosaic phrases and
sentences, and faults of taste and judgment. But he owed much to Nature;
for he was endowed with real and fervid, though unequal and irregular,
genius. To the circumstances of his life, as much as to the character of
his mind, may be attributed the pathetic sadness that pervades his
works. Occasionally, it is true, there is a faint gleam of humour; but
it is grim humour, which never glows with geniality or concentrates into
wit. Irony and quaint sarcasm, too, display themselves in some of the
Spirit scenes in “Saul.” But for sublimity of conception and power of
evoking images of horror and dread, Heavysege was unsurpassed except by
the masters of our literature. He possessed also, an intimate knowledge
of the workings of the human heart; his delineations of character were
powerful and distinct; and his pictures of impassioned emotion are
wonderful in their epic grandeur. Every page of his dramas betrays an
ardent study of the Bible, Milton, and Shakespeare, both in the
reproduction of images and thoughts, and in the prevailing accent of his
style. But he had an originality of his own; for many of his sentences
are remarkable for their genuine power, and keen and concentrated
energy. Here and there, too, we meet with exquisite pieces of
description, and some of the lyrics in “Saul” are full of rich fancy and
musical cadence. Without early culture, and amid the toilsome and
uncongenial labours of his daily life, Heavysege has established his
right to a foremost place in the Canadian Temple of Fame: what might he
not have done for himself and his adopted country, had he been favoured
by circumstances as he was by Nature! His death took place at Montreal,
in August, 1876.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Torrance, Rev. Robert=, D.D., Guelph, Ontario, was born at Markethill,
county of Armagh, Ireland, on the 23rd of May, 1825, and was the
youngest of seven sons. His ancestor on his father’s side—M.
Torrance—left Ayrshire, Scotland, during the times of the persecution,
and settled in the north of Ireland, and their descendants have lived
there, in the same locality, ever since. Robert Torrance, the subject of
this sketch, went to school at an early age in his native village, and
remained under the same tutor until he was ten years old, when he began
the study of the Latin and Greek languages. In 1837, his parents removed
to Glenluce, Wigtonshire, Scotland, and here Robert entered the school
in this place, and continued the studies he had already begun before
leaving Ireland, and began others preparatory to the life-work selected
for him by his parents. In 1839, he was enrolled as a student in the
Royal Academical Institution, Belfast, then or shortly afterwards
affiliated with the London University; then he studied Greek and logic,
and _belles-lettres_; mental and moral philosophy under Dr. Robert
Wilson; mathematics under Prof. Young; natural philosophy, including
astronomy and optics, and Hebrew under Professor Harte, assistant to Dr.
Hincks, who was then an old man, and confined his attention to the
senior class. This Dr. Hincks, was the father of the celebrated Oriental
scholar, Dr. Hincks, and of the late Sir Francis Hincks, whose name is
well known in Canada. After the completion of his art course and passing
the usual examination by the Presbytery in whose bounds he resided, he
entered on the study of divinity, in the halls of the United Secession
Church in Scotland. His first session was spent in Glasgow, and the
subsequent ones in Edinburgh. His course was completed in 1845, with the
exception of one session, and, as there was great want at that time for
missionaries to go out to Canada, he offered his services, and was
accepted, it being agreed, under the circumstances, to exempt him from
attending the last or fifth session on his furnishing testimonials as to
fitness for the field and work. These having been produced to the
satisfaction of the Committee on Foreign Missions, of which Dr. John
McKerrow was convener, the Presbytery of Kinross was instructed to take
him on trials for license, with a view to his proceeding to Canada.
According to appointment, these trials were delivered in the church at
Inverkeithing, a village in Fifeshire, about four miles south from
Dunfermline. Having passed the Presbytery and been licensed, he preached
two Sabbath days in Scotland, one for Rev. Dr. MacKelvie, in Balgedie,
in whose family he had been tutor for three seasons; and the other for
Rev. Mr. Puller, in Glenluce, where he had spent his boyhood. He then at
once left for Liverpool, taking his parents with him, and from that port
sailed, in a few days, for New York, which was reached safely after a
voyage of four weeks. Without delay, he proceeded to Toronto, and there
occupied the pulpit of Rev. Mr. Jennings for a few Sabbaths, Mr.
Jennings being at the time in Scotland recruiting his health. Mr.
Torrance spent one year as a probationer, travelling through the western
section of Canada, from Toronto to Goderich and Detroit, as he had
determined not to settle down in a charge till he had gone over a good
part of the mission field, and given as much supply as in his power.
Travelling in those days was far from possessing the conveniences and
comforts now enjoyed. There were no railways; in several of the
districts there were no stage coaches. The probationer was thus under
the necessity of purchasing a horse, and making his journeys on
horseback. In winter he was exposed at times to intense cold, and in
summer to prostrating heat. He had to clothe himself for such changes of
temperature. Roads were sometimes obstructed with snow, and he had to
wait till parties turned out and made them passable, or opened up a way
through adjoining fields; in spring and fall there was deep mud and
often the horse had difficulty in getting through, and some of the
stations were difficult of access from other causes, such as their
recent formation. Accommodation when he reached his destination, was not
always such as he had been accustomed to in the fatherland. But the
people were uniformly kind and courteous; they gave the best they had
ungrudgingly, often wishing it were better; and extended a cordial
welcome. Many an event then befell him which interested him at the time
and still lingers in his recollection. After receiving and declining
calls from three or four congregations, he accepted a call from a
congregation in Guelph, and was ordained and inducted on the 11th of
November, 1846. He remained in this charge till January, 1882, when his
resignation was placed in the hands of the Presbytery, and its
acceptance pressed. Towards the close of the same month the pastoral
relationship to his congregation was dissolved, the General Assembly
giving permission to retain his name on the Roll of Presbytery. Since
that time he has not had a stated charge, but has been frequently
employed as moderator of sessions of vacant congregations in the bounds,
and doing other work of a ministerial character. Shortly after his
settlement in Guelph, he was appointed a trustee on the High School
Board, and filled that position for a number of years. He succeeded for
a time to the superintendence of the Common (now called Public) schools,
in the south riding of the county, having the oversight of the townships
of Erin, Eramosa, Guelph and Puslinch. Finding the labours too onerous
in connection with his pastoral work, he resigned the position after two
years occupancy to the hands of the County council. Previous to this,
however, in 1855, he had been chosen by the Guelph Board of Trustees
superintendent of the schools in the town, then only three or four in
number. This situation he has since filled without interruption, and has
seen the progress made up to this date, the number of schools having
increased to twenty-six, and a class of buildings provided unsurpassed
by any in Ontario. Shortly after the Rev. Mr. Torrance’s settlement in
Guelph, a new presbytery was formed, called the Presbytery of
Wellington, and of this he was chosen clerk, and this office he filled
till the union of the churches, which took place in 1861, when Mr., now
Rev. Dr. Middlemiss, who had been clerk of the Free Church Presbytery,
was chosen clerk of the united one. In 1870, Mr. Middlemiss resigned,
and was succeeded by Mr. Torrance, who still occupies the office. The
church with which he was connected was known in his early days as the
“United Secession,” a name afterwards changed to “United Presbyterian,”
when the union between the Relief and Secession churches was effected.
For some years he filled the position of convener of their committee on
statistics, and also of their committee on the supply of vacancies and
distribution of probationers. In 1874, his name appears for the first
time as convener of the committee of the united church on statistics,
and he was continued in the office at the farther union, which took
place in 1875, and still occupies it. For some time the supply of
vacancies and allocation of probationers were under the charge of the
Home Mission committee, but they chose a sub-committee for the purpose,
and for a few years the burden of the work fell to him with the other
members. Ultimately a distinct committee was appointed by the General
Assembly, to whom this service was assigned, and he was chosen convener.
In 1880 he was chosen moderator of the Synod of Toronto and Kingston,
which met in St. James’ Square Church, Toronto, and occupied the office
for the usual period of one year. In 1883, he tendered his resignation,
when Rev. Mr. Laidlaw of St. Paul’s Church, Hamilton, was chosen to
succeed him. The scheme fell out of use, and it was considered
unnecessary to continue the committee after 1884, till 1886, when the
want of it having made itself felt, a new committee was appointed under
a revised scheme, of which Rev. Mr. Laidlaw was appointed convener by
the Assembly, and Mr. Torrance clerk by the committee, Mr. Laidlaw
feeling that he could not carry on the work of the committee in
connection with the weight and responsibility of his labours as the
minister of an important city charge. In 1884, Mr. Torrance was chosen a
life member of the British Association for the Advancement of Science at
its meeting in Montreal. In 1885, he was installed as a member of the
Canadian Postal College of the natural sciences, and in September of the
same year, he was constituted a life member of the Canadian Short-Hand
Society. For several years he has been a member, by the appointment of
the General Assembly of the Board of Examiners of Knox College, Toronto,
and the senate of that institute conferred upon him, in 1885, the
honorary degree of D.D. In 1851, he revisited Scotland, for the
restoration of his health, which had become impaired through the labours
that had been undergone; and again in 1881 he visited the old country,
accompanied by his wife. On this occasion he travelled over the greater
part of Scotland, visited Ireland and its chief cities, with the lakes
of Killarney, and crossed over to Paris, where a week was spent amid the
scenes of that gay and enchanting city. Rev. Mr. Torrance’s religious
views are Presbyterian; these he says he acquired from his parents and
is satisfied with their scriptural character, and has not changed his
mind since boyhood. Rev. Mr. Torrance may now be considered as having
retired from very active duties. In 1857, he purchased ten acres of fine
land in the neighbourhood of Guelph, and having built thereon for
himself a comfortable house, he resides there and devotes his spare time
to gardening and the cultivation of flowers, having gone to the expense
of importing from Scotland, and even China, some very rare flower seeds.
In August, 1854, he was married to Bessie Dryden, of Eramosa, whose
father and mother had come from the neighbourhood of Jedburgh, in
Scotland, and took up land in that township soon after it was thrown
open to settlers. Four children, two sons and two daughters, were born,
all of them now grown up; two of them married, one of the latter, a
daughter, having gone with her husband to China, under an engagement for
four years at the close of which they have returned.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Moore, Paul Robinson=, M.D., Sackville, New Brunswick, was born on the
30th of March, 1835, in Hopewell, Westmoreland county, New Brunswick.
(Since the county was divided, Hopewell is in Albert county). His
father, Thomas Benjamin Moore was a lawyer in Albert and Westmoreland
counties, and died in Moncton, Westmoreland county, April, 1875, aged
sixty-eight years. His mother’s maiden name was Apphia Robinson,
daughter of Deacon Paul C. Robinson, of Hopewell. She bore thirteen
children, six sons and seven daughters, of whom three sons and four
daughters still survive, the subject of this sketch being the third
child. His paternal grand-father was John W. Moore, sergeant of the 1st
battalion of Royal Artillery, and died a pensioner in Ballymena,
Ireland, at eighty-five years of age. His paternal ancestors resided in
the north of Ireland, and it is a family tradition that at the siege of
Londonderry there were seven brothers Moore, engaged in the fighting,
five of whom were slain in one attack. The remaining two survived the
perils of the siege, and their descendants are still for the most part
settled in the north of Ireland. His father was five years old when he
came to this country in 1813, when the regiment to which his
grand-father belonged was ordered out to defend Fort Cumberland. Paul
Robinson Moore received a mathematical and classical education at the
Mount Allison Institution, in Sackville, New Brunswick, up to the age of
fifteen, when on account of ill health his studies were abandoned. Three
years later, having regained his health, he commenced the study of
medicine with Dr. Wm. T. Taylor, of Philadelphia, U.S., but had to give
it up at the end of the first year, on account of another serious attack
of illness which threatened to end in phthisis. He then returned to New
Brunswick, and after recruiting his health, took a clerkship at the
Albert mines in Hillsborough, New Brunswick, for eighteen months, and
afterwards he was employed as bookkeeper and pay-master of the Boudreau
stone quarries in Westmoreland county for a year. His health being then
perfectly restored, he went to New York, and resumed his medical studies
at the university of the city of New York, receiving private instruction
at the same time from Dr. Gaillard Thomas. He graduated in March, 1859,
and was appointed house physician and surgeon of Brooklyn City Hospital
the following May, which position he held till May, 1860, when he
returned to Albert county, New Brunswick, and commenced the practice of
his profession. In January, 1875, he removed to Sackville, and entered
into a professional co-partnership with Dr. Alexander Fleming, which
continued till April, 1881, when Dr. Fleming removed to Brandon,
North-West Territory, since which time Dr. Moore has been attending
closely to his professional duties in Sackville. He was appointed
coroner for Albert county in 1866, and magistrate for the same county in
1873. The doctor has taken an interest in various companies, and is at
present a stockholder in the Moncton Cotton Company, the Sackville Music
Hall Company, and the Baptist Publishing Company. He joined the Howard
lodge of Free Masons in 1867, and Sackville division of the Sons of
Temperance in 1875; became honorary member of the Glasgow Southern
Medical Society in 1880, and president of the New Brunswick Medical
Society in 1885. He is also a member of the Medical Council. He has
never taken an active part in politics, but supports a Liberal
government, and is an uncompromising Prohibitionist. He has travelled in
England, Ireland, France, Scotland, and the United States. He has been a
member of the Baptist church since 1865. On the 12th of December, 1866,
he was married to Rebecca, eldest daughter of John Weldon, of
Dorchester, Westmoreland county, by whom he has had nine children, four
boys and five girls, of whom one boy and five girls survive.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Archambault, Urgel-Eugène=, Principal of the Catholic Commercial
Academy, Montreal, was born at L’Assomption, on the 27th of May, 1834.
His parents were Louis Archambault, farmer, and Marie-Angélique
Prud’homme, belonging to a very old family of the province of Quebec.
The Archambault family came from France and settled on the Isle of
Montreal about the year 1650, thence off-shoots established themselves
in different parts of the province of Quebec, especially at
L’Assomption, from which place three or four members of this family
were, at various times, elected to the Canadian parliament. Urgel-Eugène
having attended school at Saint-Jacques de l’Achigan and at
L’Assomption, became a teacher at the age of seventeen years (1851),
taught during six years at Saint-Ambroise de Kildare, L’Assomption,
Chateauguay, and finally completed his own studies at the
Jacques-Cartier Normal School, from which institution he received an
academic diploma. In 1858, he taught at Saint-Constant, and the
following year he became head-master of the Catholic Commercial Academy
of Montreal, the principal work of his life, and which he still directs.
This school, established in Coté street, was transferred to the Plateau
in 1871; it has become one of the principal educational institutions of
the city, and even of the province of Quebec. In 1873, Mr. Archambault
was named local superintendent of all the schools controlled by the
Catholic Board of School Commissioners. The interior plans of the
Plateau, Belmont and Olier schools are the work of his hands. This same
year, 1873, he laboured successfully to bring about the foundation of an
institution destined to form civil, mining, and industrial engineers.
This was the Polytechnic School of Montreal, founded by the Catholic
school commissioners and the Honorable Gedéon Ouimet, superintendent of
education for the province of Quebec. Intended principally for
Catholics, it was annexed to the Laval University in January, 1887. The
university, which retains Mr. Archambault as principal of the
Polytechnic School, has named him titular professor of the arts faculty.
Much of the success attending the Jacques-Cartier Normal School
conventions has been due to the active interest which he has taken in
them. He is the author of the Teachers’ Pension Fund Bill, which became
law in 1880, and was amended in 1886. In 1870, Mr. Archambault visited
Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore, Washington, Richmond
(Virginia), and became acquainted with the best educators in the United
States. Since then he has kept himself informed of their methods of
teaching and management. With the same object in view, he visited the
Centennial Exhibition at Philadelphia, in 1876. In 1878, Mr. Archambault
was sent to the Paris Exhibition, to represent the Educational
department of the province of Quebec; and while in France he was named
member of the International Educational Jury, and was the first Canadian
ever decorated with the _Palmes Académiques_, and honored with the title
of _Officier d’Académie_. On this occasion he was commissioned, by the
Minister of Public Instruction in France, to deliver the _Palmes
Académiques_ to Dr. J. B. Meilleur, and to the Honourable P. J. O.
Chauveau and G. Ouimet, who, each in turn, had directed the Educational
department of the province. To allow him to fulfil his mission at the
Paris Exhibition, he was granted a seven months’ leave of absence,
during which time he gathered an ample store of pedagogic ideas, which
he has since utilized for the benefit of his country. In 1883-4, he made
a second trip to Europe and to Northern Africa, during a six months’
leave of absence granted to him on account of his health. These voyages
brought him into communication with several eminent persons, and with
different societies. Already a member of the Saint-Jean-Baptiste and of
the Historical Society of Montreal, he became a member of the
Geographical Society of Paris; in 1882, he received the title of Knight
of the Sacred and Military Order of the Holy Sepulchre, and in 1886 he
was named honorary member of the first degree of the Universal Humane
Society of Knight-Saviors. In 1860, Mr. Archambault married
Marie-Phélonise Azilda, daughter of Dr. Robitaille, of Saint-Roch de
l’Achigan. Of the eleven children born to them, six, a son and five
daughters, are still living (1887).

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Stewart, Rev. Wm. James=, Minister of the Baptist Church, Portland
city, St. John county, New Brunswick, was born at Second Falls, St.
George, Charlotte county, New Brunswick, on the 22nd of April, 1850. His
parents, David and Agnes Stewart, were born in Newtownards, county Down,
Ireland. They came to America with their parents, and were married in
St. Andrews, New Brunswick, soon after their arrival. Shortly after this
event they removed to Second Falls, where they lived happily together
and raised a family of eleven children, William being the youngest. In
February, 1857, his mother was removed from her family by death, and
laid to rest by loving hands in the village church-yard. His father
married again, his second wife being a Mrs. Manzer, a widow lady, who
still survives him. He had no issue by this wife. In July, 1876, his
father was called to his reward, and buried beside his first wife. Both
were consistent members of the Baptist church. William James Stewart,
the subject of this sketch, was not a very rugged boy, and was therefore
kept constantly at school from his earliest boyhood. At the age of
sixteen he finished the studies in the primary schools, and as there was
no high school near his home, he was allowed to drop his studies for a
few years. In the meantime he went on a visit to his brother and sister,
both of whom were married and lived in the State of Minnesota, and after
a year and a half he returned home a young man of twenty years, with no
very definite idea of life or what he should do in the future. Not long
after this, however, there came a change into his life which decided the
future for him. The sermons of Rev. Edward Hickson, then pastor of the
Baptist church in his native place, made a very deep impression on his
mind. His father was a deacon of that church, and a very godly man, his
life and influence being in perfect accord with the truth preached from
the pulpit; and so after a good deal of anxiety of mind and earnest
prayer to God, William was led to give his heart to the Saviour, and
experience in his life that “peace which passeth all understanding.” On
the 16th of June, 1872, he was immersed in the name of the Trinity by
the Rev. E. Hickson, and received into the fellowship of the Second
Falls Baptist church. He at once felt a desire in his heart to do
something for Him who had done so much for the world, and his first work
was to organize a Sunday school in connection with the church of which
he was then a member. He also resolved to take up his long neglected
studies and prepare himself for a life of usefulness, in the world. In
October, 1872, he entered the Baptist Collegiate School in Wolfville,
Nova Scotia. He did not at that time have the ministry in view, but not
long afterward it was pressed upon him with such weight that he could
not rest day or night until he yielded to the voice of God in his soul,
and began to shape his course with this in view. On 21st May, 1874, he
received a license from the church of which he was a member, signed by
George Allen, clerk, to preach the gospel according to the faith and
practice of the Baptist church. He spent the vacations of each year of
his student life in preaching the word as opportunity offered. The
vacation of 1876 he spent at Musquash, near St. John, New Brunswick, and
God poured out His Holy Spirit wonderfully upon the people and many
precious souls were saved. There was no minister near to baptize, and he
consented to be ordained, although he was but a student. His ordination
took place on the 23rd day of May, 1876, in the Carleton Baptist church.
In May, 1877, he finished his studies at Acadia College, and received a
unanimous call to the churches at St. George and Second Falls, the
latter of which he was a member. He at once entered upon his work, and
was greatly blessed in his labours among his own people. On 1st July,
1878, he was married to Lillie S. Hanson, daughter of Vernon and Helen
Hanson, in the city of Boston, by the Rev. Dr. Lorimer. After a
pastorate of about four years in his native place, he received and
accepted a call to the Baptist church in Parrsborough, Nova Scotia. He
spent one year with this church, and then received and accepted a call
to the Baptist church in Portland city, St. John county, N.B., and on
1st June, 1882, he entered upon his duties in the church of which he is
at present (1887) the pastor. About two hundred souls have been added to
this church since he took up the work, and God is now very graciously
blessing it. The church edifice has been improved at a cost of about
fifteen hundred dollars, and a fine parsonage purchased since he began
his ministry in it. The outlook for the future is very hopeful. To God
be all the praise. Rev. Mr. Stewart has had two children, a boy and a
girl. The eldest is now a bright boy of seven years. The little girl,
too sweet and pure for earth, was taken at the age of four by Him who
said, “Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for
of such is the kingdom of heaven.”

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Bayly, Richard=, B.A., Q.C., Barrister-at-law, London, Ontario, was
born in Dublin, Ireland, on the 25th of May, 1834. He is the son of Rev.
Benjamin Bayly, and Cassandra Henrietta Bayly, who, previous to coming
to Canada, resided in Dublin, Mr. Bayly’s ancestors having resided in or
near that city for over three hundred years. The Rev. Mr. Bayly occupied
the important position of principal of the London Grammar school
(afterwards the London Collegiate Institute) for over thirty-five years,
until the 17th January, 1879, when he died, greatly respected by all who
had the honour of his acquaintance. Richard received his education at
the London Grammar school, in London, and at the University of Toronto,
where he graduated with the degree of B.A. He then studied law in the
office of the Hon. John Wilson (afterwards Justice John Wilson), and
became a barrister and solicitor in 1857, and has successfully practised
his profession in London ever since. He occupied a seat on the London
Board of Education from 1876 to 1885 inclusive, and was chairman of the
board for one year, and chairman of the School Management Committee for
four years. For nine years Mr. Bayly was a warden of St. Paul’s
Episcopal church, and for several years a delegate to the Diocesan and
Provincial synods. In politics, he belongs to the Liberal-Conservative
party, and for many years has taken an active interest in political
issues. He was brought up in the Episcopal fold, and has seen no reason
to change his religious belief. On the 22nd June, 1864, he was married
to Eliza, eldest daughter of the late Dr. Chas. G. Moore, of London, and
the issue of this marriage has been ten children, eight of whom
survive—five boys and three girls.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Mowatt, Rev. Andrew Joseph=, Pastor of St. Paul’s (Presbyterian)
Church, Fredericton, New Brunswick, is a native-born Canadian, having
first seen the light on the 11th of February, 1838, in the town of
Woodstock, Carleton county, N.B. His father, Thomas Mowatt, and mother,
Elizabeth Scott Moffatt, emigrated from Great Britain to New Brunswick,
and settled in Woodstock in 1837, where they remained for about two
years, and then moved to Harvey, York county, where Andrew, the subject
of our sketch, was brought up, and whose early recollections of the
place is a little log hut in the forest, and a small log school-house
where he received a common school education. After leaving this school,
he went for two winters to the Collegiate school in Fredericton, then in
charge of Dr. George Roberts, and afterwards he spent three terms at the
Presbyterian college at Truro, Nova Scotia, taking the regular arts
course there. He then studied theology under Rev. Dr. King, at Gerrish
Theological Hall, Halifax, N.S., and completed his studies in 1866. On
the 2nd of May of the same year, he received a license to preach the
gospel from the Presbytery of Pictou, was called to the new congregation
of Sharon church, Albion Mines, now Stellarton, and was ordained pastor
on the 5th of June following. The Rev. Mr. Mowatt retained the charge of
this church for seven years, and then left on receiving a call from St.
John’s church, Windsor, N.S., and was inducted its pastor by the
Presbytery of Halifax on the 8th of July, 1873. Here he laboured in the
Lord’s vineyard for six and a half years. He then was called to the
pastorate of St. Paul’s church in Fredericton, and was inducted into
this charge on the 8th of January, 1880, by the Presbytery of St. John;
and here he has laboured ever since. This church has greatly prospered
under Mr. Mowatt’s able ministration, and, on the 10th of January, 1886,
the congregation abandoned their old church edifice and moved into a
fine stone building, which is an ornament to the town. Rev. Mr. Mowatt
was brought up in the faith as taught by the Presbyterian church, and
has so far seen no reason to change his opinion with regard to it. He
has spent his life in his Master’s service, and he has the satisfaction
of knowing that he has done something to advance His kingdom in this
world, and, under God’s grace, fitted many a poor soul to enter the
Father’s home of many mansions. He was married to Louisa Jane Annand, of
Gay’s River, Colchester county, N.S., on the 30th of June, 1868. Her
brother, the Rev. Joseph Annand, is a missionary on the island of
Espiritu Santo, in the New Hebrides. Rev. Mr. Mowatt has a family of
nine children.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Mitchell, Hon. James=, St. Stephen, New Brunswick, was born at the
Scottish Settlement, York county, N.B., on the 16th March, 1843. His
father, William Mitchell, was a native of Inverkip, Renfrewshire,
Scotland, and came to America in 1827, settling in York county, N.B. His
mother, Ann Dobie, was a native of Dumfries, in Scotland. James Mitchell
received his education first in the public school, then in the
Collegiate Institute, and latterly in the University of New Brunswick,
at Fredericton, where, in 1867, he graduated with the degrees of B.A.,
and M.A. He afterwards studied law, and was called to the bar in
October, 1870, and has since practised his profession at St. Stephen,
Charlotte county, where he now resides. Mr. Mitchell was inspector of
schools for Charlotte county from 1872 to 1875, and from 1877 to 1879,
and during these years exercised a very material influence on the
educational affairs of his town and county. He occupied the position of
Census commissioner in 1881. He is at present a member of the Senate of
the University of New Brunswick, and a member of the Alumni Society;
also a member of the Lunatic Asylum Commission and of the Board of
Education of the province of New Brunswick. At the general election in
1882 his fellow-citizens of Charlotte county chose him to represent them
in the New Brunswick parliament; and, on the 3rd of March, 1883, he was
appointed a member of the Executive Council, and surveyor-general of the
province. On his presenting himself for re-election, he was returned by
acclamation. He was again elected at the general election in 1886. Hon.
Mr. Mitchell is a Liberal-Conservative in politics, having always
identified himself with the party of progress in the country, and is an
active promoter of railways, manufactures, and other public works. As a
barrister he stands high at the bar of his native province. He is a
past-master of the Free and Accepted Masons, and past-principal Z of the
Royal Arch Chapter. He has followed in the footsteps of his parents, and
is a consistent adherent of the Presbyterian church. On the 17th
December, 1873, he was married to Miss Ryder, of St. Stephen.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=MacFarlane, Foster=, M.D., Fairville, St. John, New Brunswick, was born
in the parish of Studholm, Kings county, N.B., on the 12th December,
1834. His father, Matthew MacFarlane, was born in the parish of Dramore,
county of Tyrone, Ireland, and was a descendant of a family of that
name, who, with others, sought refuge from the persecution then
prevailing in the Highlands of Scotland. The record of the family dates
back to the beginning of the thirteenth century. The family name of
“MacFarlane” took its origin from a grandson of the Earl of Lennox,
named Bartholomew, the Gaelic of which is “Pharlan,” whose son was named
MacFarlane (or son of Bartholomew). The seat of the Earl of Lennox was
Dumbarton castle, which was held by his descendants the MacFarlanes, at
intervals, and for six centuries they held possession of their original
lands, the principal seat of which was Arrochar, at the head of
Lochlong. The MacFarlane clan fought, and distinguished themselves, in
the battle of Langside, May 13th, 1565, their valour mainly contributing
to decide the fortunes of the day, and the defeat of Mary, Queen of
Scots. For their bravery they received from the Regent their crest and
motto which has ever since been inscribed on their family escutcheon,
“This I’ll defend.” Chief among the descendants of this ancient family
may be mentioned Walter MacFarlane, of MacFarlane, who is justly
celebrated as the indefatigable collector of the ancient records of his
country, and whose historical writings, according to Mr. Skeen, “form
the best monuments to his memory; and as long as the existence of the
ancient records of the country, or a knowledge of its ancient history
remains an object of interest to any Scotchman, the name of MacFarlane
will be handed down as one of its benefactors, which monument will be
found more enduring than the barbaric splendour of his warlike
countrymen, which has long since faded away, thus showing that it is not
the destroyer but the benefactor of his fellow-creatures who is secure
of immortality.” In 1815, when but a lad of twelve years of age, Matthew
MacFarlane, accompanied his father, James MacFarlane, and other members
of the family, to America, and on their arrival settled at Rockland, in
Kingston, Kings county, N.B. Some years afterwards, and when the family
had grown up, Mr. MacFarlane, sr., left his eldest son, Charles, on the
homestead, and removed, with Matthew and his other sons and daughters,
to Studholm, in the same county. About the year 1827, being amongst the
pioneer settlers of that part of the country, Matthew MacFarlane married
Sarah Foster, whose father, Ezekiel Foster, came from New England during
the American war. One of his brothers fought at the battle of Lexington,
and died in defending what he considered his rights, having espoused the
cause of the colonists. Foster MacFarlane, the subject of our sketch,
was the fifth child of this marriage, and first saw the light in a log
cabin, the common abode of the pioneer farmers of those days. His
earliest education was received in the parish school, and was limited to
the rudiments of an ordinary English education. At the age of twenty,
having passed the required examination before the local board then
existing, he received a license to teach in the public school. After
teaching for a time, he entered upon a course of study at the Baptist
Seminary, Fredericton, and afterwards took a special course for a time
at the University of New Brunswick. After leaving the university, he
pursued a course in medicine at Harvard University, Cambridge, United
States, and was privileged to sit at the feet of such men as Professor
Agassiz, Jeffries Wyman, Oliver Wendell Holmes, and E. Brown-Sequard, of
Paris, graduating in 1868. He first practised medicine in his native
parish for two years and a half. During this time he was appointed by
the government a coroner for Kings county. He then removed to Fairville,
St. John, N.B., where he has ever since practised his profession. He has
been a member of the Senate of the University of New Brunswick since the
spring of 1883, and a director of the Union Baptist Education Society
since its incorporation. He was one of the promoters of the Dominion
Safety Fund Life Association, filling for a number of years the position
of director, and is now its medical superintendent. He united about
thirty years ago with the Sons of Temperance, and has since belonged to
other temperance organizations, being now a member of the Independent
Order of Good Templars. He was brought up in connection with the
Methodists, but in the year 1858 his views underwent a change, and he
united with the Baptists, and is at present a member of the Fairville
Baptist church. On July 20, 1868, he was married to Elizabeth A.
Babbitt, daughter of Samuel Perry and Phœbe Babbitt, of St. John, N.B.
He has five children—one son and four daughters.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Burns, Rev. Robert Ferrier=, D.D., Pastor of the Fort Massey
Presbyterian church, Halifax, Nova Scotia. This popular minister was
born in Paisley, Scotland, on the 23rd of December, 1826. His father was
Robert Burns, D.D., and his mother, Janet Orr, daughter of the first
provost of Paisley. His mother’s sister, Susan, was mother of Sir
Archibald Orr Ewing, baronet, M.P. for Dumbarton. His father had three
brothers in the ministry of the Church of Scotland,—namely, Rev. James
Burns, who for forty years was minister of the parish of Brechin; Rev.
William H. Burns, D.D., Kilsyth; and Rev. George Burns, D.D., first
Presbyterian minister of St. John, New Brunswick, afterwards of
Tweedsmuir and Corstorphine, Scotland,—and two uncles in the service of
their Sovereign—Major-General Islay Ferrier, the last governor of
Dumbarton castle, and Sir William Hamilton, baronet, who commanded the
marines that pulled the guns up to the Plains of Abraham, in 1759, at
the taking of Quebec. Miss Ferrier, author, and friend of Sir Walter
Scott, was a second cousin. Rev. Dr. Burns, sr., was pastor for
thirty-three years of Dr. Witherspoon’s church (Laigh Kirk and St.
George’s), Paisley, and moved to Toronto in 1845, and became the first
pastor of Knox’s Church in that city, and professor in Knox’s College.
He died at Toronto on the 19th of August, 1869; and his widow on the
22nd of August, 1882. Rev. Dr. Robert Ferrier Burns received his early
education at the High school of Paisley, and then entered the University
of Glasgow, where he remained four years, taking honours in Latin,
Greek, logic, and moral philosophy. He studied theology in the New
College (Free Church), Edinburgh, and Knox’s College, Toronto. In April,
1847, he was licensed to preach by the Presbytery of Toronto, and on the
1st of July following he was ordained pastor of Chalmer’s Presbyterian
church, Kingston, Ontario. He was Presbyterian chaplain in the 71st
Highland Light Infantry for a year. He remained in this charge for eight
years, and, during his ministry there, succeeded in having built for his
congregation a handsome church edifice. In July, 1855, he moved to St.
Catharines, and was settled over Knox Presbyterian church of that place.
A fine building was erected by his people for him. Here he ministered
until March, 1867, when he accepted a call from the Scotch Presbyterian
church in Chicago, United States, to become its first pastor, and,
during his residence there of three years, a church was built. In 1866,
the degree of D.D. was conferred upon him by Hamilton College, New York.
In April, 1870, he was translated to Côté Street Presbyterian church
(now Crescent street), Montreal, as successor to Principal MacVicar,
where he did good work. On the 18th of March, 1875, he became pastor of
Fort Massey Presbyterian church in Halifax, as successor to the Rev. J.
K. Smith, M.A., now of Galt, who for two years had been first pastor of
this influential congregation. In 1873, Dr. Burns occupied the position
of moderator of the Synod of Montreal, and in 1883 he was moderator of
the Synod of the Maritime provinces. During his residence in Montreal he
was chairman of the Presbyterian College Board; and, for the past twelve
years, has acted as chairman of the Halifax College Board. In 1880 he
was sent as a delegate to the Raikes’ centenary celebration in London,
and during the same year he represented the Assembly of the Presbyterian
Church of Canada in the Presbyterian Council at Philadelphia. In 1884 he
was a delegate from the same church to the council held in Belfast,
Ireland, where he read one of the papers presented to that body, and was
appointed one of its executive committee. This year (1887) the doctor
has been nominated for the moderatorship of the General Assembly of the
Presbyterian Church, which meets in Winnipeg, Manitoba, in June next.
Rev. Dr. Burns takes a great interest in Sunday-school work, and was one
of the first to advocate the establishment of Sunday-school conventions
in Canada, which have done so much of late years to advance this branch
of Christian work. As a platform speaker he stands high, and has often
spoken on subjects, professional and otherwise, before large audiences.
At present he is lecturer on theological themes in the Presbyterian
College at Halifax. As a book-writer, too, he has done his share. His
life of his father, a volume of nearly five hundred pages, published in
Toronto in 1873, soon went through three editions. His other writings,
“Sketch of Abraham Lincoln,” “The Presbyterian Church,” “Modern
Babylon,” “The Maine Law,” “Christian Liberality,” “Confession and
Absolution,” and a variety of sermons and tracts—have all been
favourably received, and commanded a good sale. He has also contributed
largely to the columns of the newspaper press and our periodicals. Dr.
Burns has travelled a good deal, and has visited Great Britain, Ireland,
France, Germany, and various other places in Europe, and is very
familiar with Canada and the United States. He was married on the 1st of
July, 1852, at Belleville, Ontario, to Elizabeth, second daughter of
Rufus Holden, M.D., a much esteemed physician, and elder of the
Presbyterian church, in Belleville. Dr. Burns has eight children—four
sons and four daughters.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Bullock, Joseph=, Oil Merchant, St. John, New Brunswick, is a native of
Springfield, Ohio, and was born on September 6th, 1833. His father was
William Bullock, a native of Staffordshire, England, who came to the
United States a few years prior to the birth of Joseph. His mother’s
maiden name was Ann Clark Peacock, she being of the Yorkshire family of
that ilk. His mother’s parents came out to Ohio about the same time as
Mr. Bullock, sr. Mr. Peacock went there to accept the position of
engineer for the state of Ohio. Joseph Bullock’s parents removed to
Hamilton, Ontario, in the spring of 1834, he then being only a few
months old. Two years later they removed to what is now known as
Bullock’s Corners, near Dundas, the place taking its name from his
father. It was here Mr. Bullock spent his boyhood, and got what
education could in those days be procured in the public school of the
vicinity. On leaving school he helped his father in his business, which,
by the way, was that of lumberman. During the time he was so engaged, he
married when in his 25th year, Elizabeth, daughter of Isaac Duffield, a
farmer of the township of Glanford, South Wentworth. Two years after his
marriage, the lumber business declining, he commenced business as
general store-keeper at Bullock’s Corners, which he continued for about
three years. After this he settled upon a farm he owned in West
Flamboro’, and worked it for two years. His father having died in the
meantime, he left West Flamboro’ and took up his residence at the old
homestead. Here he remained about three years, travelling occasionally
for his brothers-in-law, Duffield Bros., of London, oil refiners. In the
year 1869, Confederation being an accomplished fact, Mr. Bullock removed
to St. John, New Brunswick, to engage in the oil business, which has now
assumed such large proportions. His original intention was to handle
Canadian oil exclusively, but as the years rolled on, American products
had also to be handled, and he is now the largest dealer in oils in the
maritime provinces. In politics, Mr. Bullock is thoroughly independent,
voting more on the character of the man than from purely party motives.
It is, however, in the religious world that Mr. Bullock is most
conspicuous. As a boy he was identified more particularly with the
Church of England, but at the age of about twenty years he became a
member of the Methodist church, of which he is a consistent and earnest
member. Prior to the great fire of 1877, Mr. Bullock was a trustee of
the old German Street Methodist Church, the oldest church in the city,
and after its destruction by that fire, was chairman of the building
committee of the present Queen Square Methodist Church, and of which he
still continues a trustee. It was largely to his energy and liberality
that the erection of this church was due. He is also a member of the
quarterly board of his church, and is one of the board of directors of
the British and Foreign Bible Society for the city of St. John. He is a
total abstainer, and has been for the most of his life, and is
pronounced in favour of the prohibition of the liquor traffic. When Gen.
Booth visited St. John, he was the guest of Mr. Bullock. Mr. Bullock has
had a family of three children, one of whom is deceased, and the
remaining ones, two sons, are associated with him in business.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Binney, Irwine Whitty=, Collector of Customs, Port of Moncton, New
Brunswick, was born on the 10th of July, 1841, at Halifax, Nova Scotia.
He is a son of the late Stephen Binney, who for many years was a leading
merchant in Halifax, and who, when the city was incorporated, was
elected its first mayor. Mr. Binney, sr., acting as mayor, on the
occasion of the birth of the Prince of Wales, visited England, and
presented an address to Her Majesty the Queen, signed by a large number
of the citizens. This gentleman was grandson of the late Hon. Hibbert N.
Binney, who for a period of nearly forty years, filled the office of
collector of customs and excise at Halifax, and was also a member of the
Legislative Council; and great-grandson of the late Hon. Jonathan
Binney, one of the first residents of Halifax, who was a member of the
first Legislative Assembly (1758) of the province. He and Frederick des
Barras met the Indian chiefs at Arichat, New Brunswick, in 1761, and
concluded a lasting peace, and was appointed to the Legislative Council
in 1768; second judge at St. John’s Island (near Prince Edward Island);
and also collector of customs for the island. I. W. Binney, the subject
of this sketch, is brother to William Pryor Binney, Her Britannic
Majesty’s consul at Syra, Greece, and was educated at various schools,
including the Sackville Academy, New Brunswick, receiving a commercial
education. In his younger days he found employment as a clerk in several
commercial houses; and from 1861 to 1864, he was in the old established
and well known lumber firm of Gilmour, Rankin & Co., Miramichi, New
Brunswick. He also carried on a wholesale business at Chatham, New
Brunswick, for a few years, and afterwards engaged in mining operations
in Nova Scotia and Cape Breton, in company with the late Sir A. J. Smith
and others. He was appointed a clerk in Her Majesty’s customs in 1874,
and promoted to the collectorship at the port of Moncton, New Brunswick,
in 1883. He joined the Freemasons in 1862; was made a Royal-Arch-Mason
in 1866, and Knight Templar in 1870. At present he is a past master of
Keith lodge of Moncton, New Brunswick. He is an Episcopalian in his
religious views. Mr. Binney’s father moved to Moncton, New Brunswick,
from Halifax, in 1845, and died there in 1872. Mr. Binney is unmarried,
and his mother and widowed sister reside with him.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Berthelot, Hon. Joseph Amable=, Judge of the Superior Court of
Montreal. This learned judge was born on the 8th of May, 1815, at St.
Eustache, county of Two Mountains, by the marriage of Joseph Amable
Berthelot, notary, and Dame Marie M. Hervieux. Mr. Berthelot’s father
was from Quebec, where he finished his classical studies in 1796, having
been the classmate of the late Hon. Judge Thomas Taschereau, the father
of his eminence the Cardinal, and also that of the late Hon. Judge
Vanfelson, who died in Montreal. Judge Berthelot began his Latin course
in 1824, and finished it on the 9th of June, 1832, when at the age of
seventeen. The course that year was suddenly terminated, on account of
the cholera, the professors having deemed it prudent to send back the
scholars to their families in the month of June. In the month of October
of the same year he began his legal studies, being indentured with the
late Hon. Sir. L. H. Lafontaine, who had married his cousin in 1830. Sir
George E. Cartier, who was his classmate at college, also commenced
studying law in 1832, in the office of the late Etienne E. Rodier,
advocate, M.P.P. for the county of l’Assomption. After being admitted to
the bar in November, 1836, he became the partner of Mr. Lafontaine, and
continued to practise his profession in such partnership until July,
1853, when Mr. Lafontaine was appointed chief justice of the province of
Lower Canada on the demise of the late Sir James Stuart. A few days
after, Mr. Berthelot entered into partnership with his friend, the late
Sir George E. Cartier, and continued this partnership until he was
appointed assistant judge of the Superior Court, succeeding the late
Hon. C. D. Day, who was appointed codifier in February, 1859. On Justice
Day’s resignation having been accepted by the government, in 1860, Judge
Berthelot was immediately appointed permanent judge of the Superior
Court. On this occasion, in December, 1860, the bar of Montreal held a
meeting in order to express publicly their satisfaction of the
appointment of Judge Berthelot to the bench, and adopted resolutions,
copies of which were transmitted to the judge, and also published in the
newspapers of the day, amongst others in _La Minerve_. These resolutions
read as follow:

    At a special meeting of the members of the bar of Lower Canada
    section of this district, which was held on Wednesday, the 12th
    of December instant, it was unanimously resolved:

    1. Moved by Henry Stuart, seconded by Gédéon Ouimet, M.P.P.,
    That the bar of Montreal has seen with real pleasure the
    promotion of the Honourable J. A. Berthelot, whose talents, high
    sense of honour, integrity, conscientious work and services
    already rendered as assistant judge, are a sure guarantee of the
    faithfulness with which he will fulfil the difficult duties of
    the new office which he has just entered as permanent judge of
    the Superior Court.

    2. Moved by Andrew Robertson, seconded by C. A. Leblanc, That as
    citizens, and with due regard to public interest, the barristers
    of Montreal cheerfully greet the appointment of Mr. Justice
    Berthelot, and as his _confrères_, they are highly honoured as a
    body by this new appointment.

    3. Moved by the Honourable T. J. J. Loranger, seconded by J. C.
    Daly, That copies of the foregoing resolutions be transmitted by
    the _bâtonnier_ and secretary to Mr. Justice Berthelot, and that
    the secretary be authorized to publish them in the city papers.

          (Signed)         ROBERT MACKAY, _Bâtonnier_,

          (Signed)         MEDERIC MARCHAND, _Secretary_.

The French paper, _L’Ordre_, made the following comments on the
foregoing resolutions:

    We have already fully expressed our opinion on this subject, and
    to-day we are happy to see the bar of Montreal confirming our
    appreciation of this appointment.

During the time that Mr. Berthelot practised at the bar, his _confrères_
elected him twice to the dignity of _bâtonnier_, in 1858 and 1859.
Whilst he exercised his duties of judge in Montreal, in the space of
fifteen years, he was called upon to perform the same duties of judge at
Ste. Scholastique, district of Terrebonne. In February, 1872, he was
invited by the members of the bar of that district, numbering seventeen,
to a complimentary public dinner by the following resolutions, which
were then published in the press:

    At the meeting of the bar of the district of Terrebonne, held at
    Ste. Scholastique on the 7th of February, 1872, it was resolved:

    1. Moved by J. H. Filion, seconded by Mr. Boisseau, that Mr.
    Burroughs be appointed chairman, and Mr. Rochon be requested to
    act as secretary.

    2. Moved by Mr. Wilfrid Prévost, seconded by J. A. H. Mackay,
    That a public dinner be given to the Hon. J. A. Berthelot, by
    the bar of the district of Terrebonne, as an acknowledgment of
    our esteem and respect for his honour.

    3. Moved by J. A. H. Mackay, seconded by J. H. Filion, That the
    chairman and Mr. Wilfrid Prévost be delegated to interview his
    honour, and express the desire of the bar to give him a dinner,
    and in order that he may fix the date that he will find
    convenient.

          (Signed)         C. S. BURROUGHS, _Chairman_,

          (Signed)         A. ROCHON, _Secretary_.

Judge Berthelot regretted that he could not accept a demonstration which
would be so creditable for himself from the bar of the district of
Terrebonne, being on the eve of sailing for Europe, during a leave of
absence which had been granted to him by the Government for recuperating
his health, which was slightly impaired by his strict attendance to his
judicial duties. Before his appointment to the bench in 1859, he had
been called upon to fulfil the office of assistant judge in Montreal for
six months, in 1855 and 1856, during which time the judges of the
province had to act as such during the sittings of the Seignorial Court
for Lower Canada. On the 28th of November, 1875, his Lordship Archbishop
Bourget, intimated to Judge Berthelot that he had just received from
Rome a letter from his Excellency Monsignor Roncetti, Ablegate,
informing him that His Holiness Pius IX. had been pleased to appoint him
Commander of the Order of St. Sylvestre, by an apostolical writ, dated
the 24th of September then last, enclosed with the Ablegate’s letter,
adding that His Holiness had been so kind and so generous that through
the agency of His Eminence Cardinal Antonelli, he had consented to give
to Mr. Berthelot himself the decoration of the Commandery of the Order
of St. Sylvestre, which he had confided to the care of Mr. Harel,
procurator of the archbishop. The newspaper _Le Monde_, of Paris,
France, on the 28th of December, 1875, noticed this honour granted to
Judge Berthelot in the following terms:

    We do not doubt that the appointment of Judge Berthelot will be
    hailed with pleasure by the numerous friends that he has in
    France, who have had occasion to appreciate, during his several
    visits to our continent, how he was worthy in all respects, of
    the high distinction which had been conferred upon him.

His Excellency, Monsignor Roncetti, in a letter bearing date of
February, 1876, wrote as follows to Judge Berthelot:

    MY DEAR AND HONOURED COMMANDER,—With your very kind letter of
    the 20th of January, for which I am very thankful, I have also
    received, through the agency of Mr. Harel, your letter for his
    Eminence Cardinal Antonelli, who entrusted me with his answer,
    which you will find herewith:—In renewing my sincere
    congratulations, I beg to present my homage to the most
    excellent lady, Madame Berthelot, to your dear children, and to
    accept at the same time the assurance of my most perfect esteem
    and profound respect. Expecting with the greatest impatience the
    day when I will see you in Rome, I have the honour to be, my
    dear and honoured Commander,

                            Your most humble and devoted servant,
                                                    CESAR RONCETTI.

In the same month of February, 1876, Judge Berthelot was in receipt of a
letter from his Eminence, Cardinal Antonelli, in Italian, which read as
follows:

    ILLUSTRISSIME SIGNOR,—I have presented, with great pleasure, to
    the Holy Father the expressions of gratitude which your
    illustrissime lordship has given me in his letter of the 20th of
    January last, because our Holy Father had conferred upon you the
    Commandership of St. Sylvestre, which you acknowledged to be
    entirely due to the apostolic benevolence. His Holiness was
    raptured when he saw these expressions of veneration and love
    for his venerable person, and could not refrain from answering
    to them by words of gratitude, and by giving you, from the
    bottom of his heart, his apostolic benediction. Having thus
    accomplished the wishes which you expressed to me, I have the
    honour to be, your illustrissime lordship,

                                                  Yours,
                                            Sec. GIACOMO ANTONELLI.

The following particulars about the knighthood are found in the
supplement of “Bouillet’s Dictionary,” page 42:

                       ORDER OF THE GOLDEN SPUR.

    A Roman order founded by Paul III., in 1554, or by Pius IV. in
    1559, has been established, according to some writers, by
    Constantinus, as far back as 312, to commemorate his victory
    over Maxencius, and approved since then by the Pope St.
    Sylvestre. Its object was to reward civil merit, admitting only
    noblemen; it could also be conferred on foreigners. Some
    princely families of Rome and a few high dignitaries could
    confer the order, which soon occasioned serious errors. Gregory
    XVI. reformed the order in 1841, and gave the name of St.
    Sylvestre, or the Reformed Golden Spur. The knights wore a
    golden cross with eight points, and white enamelled, showing the
    portrait of St. Sylvestre. It is worn with a ribbon striped red
    and black; between, the branches of the cross hangs a golden
    spur. Before the Reformation, when England was Catholic, and
    when the relations of that country with the court of Rome were
    uninterrupted, as soon as a chief justice of the Court of King’s
    Bench, was appointed, the writ of commandership of the order of
    St. Sylvestre was forwarded to him by the Pope, and he wore on
    his chain of office the letters S. S. Since England has become
    Protestant, the writ is not sent to that country; nevertheless,
    when a new chief justice is appointed, and when he orders at the
    court goldsmith the chain of office which he wears on his neck,
    he receives it still with the same initials S.S., as in olden
    times.

This fact is warranted by photographs of Chief Justices Bovill and
Campbell, which Judge Berthelot has in his possession, and which were
given him by his friend, Judge Mackay. In a legal review, entitled
_Albany Law Journal_ for 1874, in the issue of the 8th of August, we
find an article headed, “Article on Campbell’s Lives of Chief Justices,”
with the following comments:

    And while there were among the wearers of the collar of S. S.,
    men whose lives are neither helpful nor inspiring, there were
    many of whom it is good to read.

In Canada the first person who received a writ of commandership of St.
Sylvestre, was the late Sir L. H. Lafontaine, chief justice, in the year
1853. Judge Berthelot was appointed in 1875, as above mentioned. In
1876, after eighteen years of judicial services, he asked and obtained
his superannuation, and on this occasion the _Montreal Gazette_, of the
28th of August, 1876, published the following:

    The Ottawa Government has at last come to a determination which
    enables it to accept the resignation of Mr. Justice Berthelot.
    Nearly a year has elapsed since it was generally understood that
    Mr. Justice Berthelot desired to obtain that relaxation from
    judicial duties to which twenty years service had fairly
    entitled him, but as our readers are aware, ministers were
    seriously embarrassed in the disposal of this piece of
    patronage, and the learned judge was requested to defer his
    proposed relinquishment of official duties. Before reference is
    made to his successor, it is but justice to say a word or two
    respecting Hon. Judge Berthelot. If the hon. judge has not
    obtained the first rank of judicial fame, no one will venture to
    deny that he has occupied a most honourable position on the
    bench of this province, or that his services have been of a
    highly beneficial character. It were scant justice to say that
    his character has been constantly honourable, his impartiality
    unchallenged, and his intelligence of the most vigorous type.
    Laborious without complaining, diligent without ostentation, Mr.
    Justice Berthelot has never proved unequal to the arduous
    demands of his position. His knowledge of real estate and
    insurance law, extensive and profound, and his decisions upon
    these, as well as many other branches of the law, were received
    with the utmost respect and confidence. In determination of
    cases in which juries are more or less liable to be influenced
    by sympathy for the sufferers, he did not hesitate to adhere to
    those leading principles which have been consecrated by time and
    experience, in preference to yielding to impulses which might
    create a dangerous precedent. In fine, Mr. Justice Berthelot’s
    judicial career has been conscientious, able and upright, and
    entitles him to the gratitude of his countrymen.

_Le Nouveau-Monde_, on 29th of August, 1876, reprinting the above
article from the _Gazette_, accompanied it with the following remarks:

    This testimony is corroborated by all those who had occasion to
    appreciate personally the talents, the carefulness, the
    integrity, and the knowledge displayed by this hon. judge in the
    exercise of his judicial duties. Some of his decisions in cases
    of the highest importance fully demonstrated the fact, that he
    was imbued with a sound judgment and a knowledge of
    jurisprudence and statutory laws sufficient to make his
    reputation and authority cope with that of the most
    distinguished judges who have illustrated our Canadian bench.
    Liberated from the toils and fatigues of the important position
    which he has just vacated, Judge Berthelot, we hope, will not
    withdraw entirely from public life, and the population of this
    province could still benefit by his great experience, his
    serious studies, and his deep knowledge of men and things, which
    he has acquired during more than twenty years on the bench.

Judge Berthelot has since remained in private life, without an occasion
to make himself useful to his country. Whilst he was practising at the
bar, he had been often requested to enter parliament by several counties
of the district of Montreal, and in 1858, when the division of Alma was
to elect its first representative in the Legislative Council, he had
been requested to be a candidate by a great number of the citizens of
the division, one of the two candidates at that time being willing to
withdraw in his favour if he accepted the candidature. But Mr. Berthelot
had always refused, in order that his partners and friends, Sir L. H.
Lafontaine and Sir George E. Cartier, be not deprived of the services he
was rendering them, while these statesmen were engaged in political
life, with so much credit to themselves and satisfaction for the
country. Mr. Berthelot since that time has travelled several times in
England, France and Italy, where he has made several friends, with whom
he still keeps an active correspondence. In conclusion, we may say that
during the second rebellion, in November, 1838, Mr. Berthelot was
arrested and sent to gaol without cause or warrant, with many of the
best citizens of Montreal, viz., Messieurs Lafontaine, the two Messieurs
Viger, M. Papineau, a brother of the speaker, Dr. Lusignan, Mr. Fabre,
Mr. DeBoucherville, sr., Amable Badeaux, his cousin, and his young
friend Dr. Perreault. The latter was soon let free to attend his young
wife. Mr. Berthelot, having inquired, by a letter addressed to Colonel
Goldie, secretary of his Excellency the Governor, Sir John Colborne, for
the cause of his arrest, expressing by his letter his readiness to be
brought to trial, received no written answer, but a few days after was
invited to leave the gaol and go to his home. At the same time he had
also written to the late Andrew Stuart, solicitor-general, residing at
Montreal, with whom he was well acquainted, representing in proper terms
against his unjust detention, and always thought that he owed much to
the interest of Mr. Stuart for his immediate release. Of Mr. Stuart, the
solicitor-general, much can be said; that he was at least equal, if not
superior to his brother, the late Sir James Stuart, chief justice of
Quebec.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=MacLeod, Rev. John M.=, Presbyterian minister of Zion church,
Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island. This greatly respected divine was
born at the West River of Pictou, in the province of Nova Scotia, on the
25th of August, 1827. His father, Ebenezer MacLeod, was also a native of
the West River of Pictou. He was a man of fair education, of sound
judgment, of extensive information, and of deep and fervent piety. He
was for many years an elder in the congregation of Salem, Green Hill,
and was secretary of what is claimed to have been the first temperance
society in this Dominion. His parents were from Scotland. He was married
to Barbara Benvie, daughter of James Benvie, of Musquodoboit, and died
in the 82nd year of his age. The subject of this brief sketch, having
received a good English education in the common schools of the country,
entered a printing office in the town of Pictou, and served a regular
apprenticeship to the printing business. He, however, in compliance with
the earnest wish of his parents, resumed his studies with a view to the
ministry. He entered the Pictou Academy, where for two years he studied
Latin, Greek, natural philosophy, and mathematics, under Professors Bell
and Hay. About this time the Presbyterian church of Nova Scotia, for the
purpose of training a native ministry, opened what was known as the West
River Seminary, the head teacher of which was the Rev. James Ross, D.D.,
afterwards principal of Dalhousie College, Halifax. Mr. MacLeod was one
of twelve students who entered the first year this institution was
opened. Here he took the regular arts course of four years, and studied
theology three years under Rev. John Keir, D.D., and Rev. James Smith,
D.D. He was licensed in the spring of 1853, was called to the
congregation of Richmond Bay during the following summer, and after
taking another term in the Theological Hall, was ordained and inducted
into the pastoral charge of the above named congregation on the 9th
Nov., 1854, where he laboured with much success for nearly seven years.
During the fourth year of his ministry he was married to Amelia Parker,
daughter of Francis R. Parker, of Nova Scotia, who for many years was a
member of the Provincial legislature. He was married to his present
wife, Mrs. L. G. Taylor, in 1879. In 1860 Rev. Mr. MacLeod accepted a
call to Newport, Hants county, Nova Scotia, where he continued to labour
with acceptance and success for ten years. While in Newport he declined
a call to Boston, Massachusetts, and in 1870 accepted one to New
Glasgow, Pictou, Nova Scotia. But there being at this time four
Presbyterian congregations in the small town of New Glasgow, and Rev.
Mr. MacLeod, believing that his labours were more required elsewhere,
accepted a call to his present charge, into which he was inducted on the
19th of July, 1871. His labours in this field have been crowned with a
fair measure of success. On two different occasions additions of over
one hundred and twenty, mostly young persons, were made to the communion
roll. Mr. MacLeod is at present clerk of the presbytery. He has held
that position for twenty-one years in the Presbytery of Prince Edward
Island, and for seven years in the Presbytery of Halifax, Nova Scotia.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Sifton, Hon. John Wright=, Brandon, Manitoba, was born in the township
of London, county of Middlesex, Ontario, on the 10th August, 1833. He is
the youngest son of Bamlet and Mary Sifton, who came from the county of
Tipperary, Ireland, in 1832, and settled in London township. His
ancestors on both sides were English. He received his education in the
public and grammar schools of London. Up until 1860 he devoted his time
to farming and other business, when he removed to Oil Springs, in
Lambton county, and engaged in the oil business as producer and refiner.
Here he purchased a large tract of oil lands immediately surrounding the
famous gum beds, and afterwards sold them to an American company. This
was the first foreign company that invested in Canadian oil property,
and they continued to develop the resources of their territory until the
enormous yield of oil at Petrolia made it impossible for them to
successfully compete with this more productive locality. In 1870, Mr.
Sifton removed to Paris, Brant county, with the object of having his
children educated at the grammar school there; and in 1872, in company
with his brother, contracted for and built forty miles of the track of
the Canada Southern Railway. In 1873, he moved to London, and was
appointed secretary of the Oil Association, and this office he held
until the association ceased operations. In 1874, in company with two
other gentlemen, whose interests he soon after bought out, he was
awarded the contract for building and maintaining for five years a
telegraph line from the city of Winnipeg to Fort Pelley, and clearing
the track a hundred feet wide, for a distance of about three hundred
miles, for the then contemplated Canadian Pacific Railway. Although this
contract, when it was entered into, appeared to be one likely to give a
fair profit, yet it afterwards turned out the opposite way. The fearful
wet seasons of 1876, ’77, and ’78, flooded the country for forty miles
east of Lake Manitoba, and sixty miles west along the line to, in some
places, a depth of six feet, making it impossible to keep the line up,
and as the Government refused to make any allowance for this, the loss
was very great. Some idea may be formed of the difficulty of performing
work in this country at that time, when we state that, one winter,
provisions having ran out at one of Mr. Sifton’s camps, he had to send
supplies by dog-trains 160 miles, and then have it carried on men’s
backs, 60 miles further, making it to cost twelve cents per pound
freight from Winnipeg to the camp, and at no time during the best part
of the season could he deliver the same goods at their destination for
less than five cents per pound freight. In 1875, the firm of Sifton,
Ward & Co. were awarded the contracts for sections thirteen and fourteen
of the Canadian Pacific Railway, and Mr. Sifton, the senior member of
the firm, undertook charge of section fourteen, which commenced at Red
River, and extended a distance of seventy-seven miles to Cross Lake.
During this time he removed to Manitoba, settling at Selkirk, and here
he remained until the completion of his telegraph and railroad
contracts. The money involved in these two operations amounted to about
a million and a half dollars. In 1879, he took up his abode in Winnipeg,
where he purchased some real estate outside the city limits, and erected
for himself a fine residence. Taking advantage of the “boom of 1881,” he
sold out this property and moved to Brandon, where he now resides. Here
he has invested a considerable sum of money in farming lands, and for
four years succeeded in raising in each year from 10,000 to 18,000
bushels of grain. But the years of frost (1883, ’84, ’85) having made
the raising of wheat or grain in large quantities a risky business, and
the collapse in values of all kinds of property, especially real estate,
have forced Mr. Sifton to suspend business operations in this direction
for the present. However, from his experience of over twelve years in
the North-West country, and a thorough practical knowledge of farming,
he thinks that although extensive farming has been in the past, and may
prove in the future from certain causes, a failure, when compared with
Ontario, yet he is impressed with the idea that it cannot be equalled on
this continent for fertility; always providing, however, that the
present hindrances to its prosperity be removed. What Mr. Sifton wants
for his country is fair competition in freights; the abolition of all
monopoly; readjustment of our present tariff, so that it may have the
same chance as Ontario; a reasonable homestead law that will not be
changed every year, and pre-emptions at such a price that the settler
can meet it in a reasonable time. If these concessions were made, he
thinks the North-West would make such strides onward that the most
sanguine of us would fail to realize. Mr. Sifton, during his busy life,
has devoted time to other things besides purely business matters. In
1852, he became a member of the Order of the Sons of Temperance, and in
1854, he also joined the Good Templars, and has kept up his connection
with these active temperance organizations to the present time. In 1867,
he became one of the United Templars, and from 1876 to 1883 he acted in
the capacity of president of their Grand Lodge in Manitoba. He was grand
worthy chief templar of the Grand Lodge of Manitoba of the Independent
Order of Good Templars in 1884, and is at present president of the
Manitoban Branch of the Dominion Alliance for the suppression of the
liquor traffic, and has been since its formation in 1879. He took the
leading part in the contest for the Scott Act, when it was passed in the
counties of Lisgar and Marquette. These counties extend over about three
quarters of the old province of Manitoba. The act was carried by very
large majorities,—more than two to one voting in its favour; but on
account of the vagueness of the meaning of some of its provisions in
reference to counties in Manitoba, and the impossibility of getting it
amended, it still remains a dead letter. In politics, Mr. Sifton is a
Liberal. In 1878, he received the unanimous nomination of the Liberal
party for the Commons for the county of Lisgar, and organized and
carried on the campaign up to the memorable day, the 17th of September,
1878. The 18th being nomination day in Manitoba, and the news reaching
there of the defeat of the Mackenzie government, his committee had a
hurried meeting on the morning before nomination, and decided that it
would be better for the county if he would withdraw, and allow a
supporter of the Macdonald government to be elected by acclamation, and
this he consented to do. In the fall of the same year he received the
nomination for the Local House for the electoral division of St.
Clemens, and was elected by a large majority, and on the assembling of
the house he was elected speaker. During the sitting of this parliament
a redistribution bill was passed, giving the new settlers something like
fair representation, which they had not hitherto enjoyed. At the next
general election he ran for one of the new electoral divisions, and was
defeated. In 1881, when the province was enlarged, he ran for the
division of Brandon and was elected. In the general election of 1883 he
was defeated; and again at the last general election for the division of
West Brandon he met the same fate by a small majority. Mr. Sifton was
reeve of Oil Springs and a member of the County council of Lambton
during the years 1867, ’68 and ’69. He was chairman of the school board
of same place in 1868-69, and was reeve of the municipality of
Cornwallis for 1885-86, but declined the nomination in 1887. He has been
a justice of the peace for the province since 1875. He has travelled
over the whole of the Dominion of Canada, and is familiar with all parts
of the United States north and south, and as far west as Omaha. Mr.
Sifton is a member of the Methodist church from choice. Before the union
he was a Wesleyan Methodist, and since then his opinions have not
changed much on religious subjects, except that he has more confidence
in those who differ from him in church affairs than he had in his
younger days, and now has a greater love for and confidence in the
teachings and doctrines of the church of his choice. He was a member of
the General conference of 1882, and a member of the committee appointed
by that conference to confer with committees appointed by other branches
of the Methodist church on union. He was strongly in favour of union,
and was a member of the conference held in Belleville when the union was
consummated. At the conference in 1882, he took the leading part in
having Manitoba and the North-West set apart as a separate annual
conference, which was agreed to at that conference. He was also a member
of the General conference held in Toronto in 1886. He is now a member of
the general board of missions of the Methodist church, and has been a
member of the local board of missions in the Manitoba and the North-West
conference since its formation. He has also been a member of Manitoba
and North-West annual conference since the admission of laymen, and is
president of the Brandon branch of the Upper Canada Bible Society. He
has always been actively engaged in Sabbath school and church work, and
is superintendent of the Brandon Sabbath-school. And as for temperance
work, he has spent much time and labour in this direction, and has
spoken in almost every section of the country on the subject. He was
married 1st October, 1853, to Kate, third daughter of James and Sarah
Watkins, of Parsonstown, King’s county, Ireland, and has three children
living. His oldest and only daughter, Sophia, was educated at Hamilton
Female College, and is married to A. N. Molesworth, civil engineer, now
construction engineer for the St. Paul, Minneapolis, and Manitoba
Railway Co. His oldest son, Arthur Lewis, graduated from Cobourg
University in arts, studied law in Manitoba, was called to the bar in
1882, and is now practising law in Prince Albert. His youngest son,
Clifford, graduated from Cobourg, and is a gold medallist; he studied
law in Manitoba, was called to the bar in 1882 in his twenty-second
year, and is now practising law at Brandon.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Armstrong, Rev. W. D.=, M.A., Ph. D., Pastor of St. Paul’s
(Presbyterian) Church, Ottawa, Ontario, was born at Cavan, Durham
county, Ontario, on the 28th of July, 1845, and is the son of John D.
Armstrong, yeoman, of that place. After a preliminary education in the
schools of his native place, he entered Upper Canada College, and soon
attained to a front place in his classes. At the close of his term he
carried off the Governor-General’s prize, and the classical, the
mathematical, and modern language prizes. He then entered the Toronto
University, and graduated from that institution in 1870, the silver
medallist in metaphysics and ethics, and prizeman in Hebrew, Chaldee and
Syriac. During his course in the university he also obtained a number of
scholarships and prizes in various departments. After leaving Toronto
University he took a course in theology in Knox (Presbyterian) College,
Toronto, where he likewise distinguished himself. On the 14th of May,
1874, he was ordained pastor of his present charge, and has continued
ever since (with one short break, when he was sent to Great Britain in
1883 for a few months, in the interest of the French Canadian missions),
as the faithful exponent of Christ’s message of love to the world,
greatly appreciated and esteemed by his congregation. In 1886, the
Boston University conferred upon him the degree of Doctor of Philosophy.
Rev. Dr. Armstrong has a strong liking for literature, and amidst his
various arduous parish cares and duties, has found time to contribute a
good many articles to the newspaper press, and publish several sermons.
On the 29th of September, 1886, he married Jean W., daughter of Henry J.
Johnston, of Montreal, a very accomplished lady, and one who has proved
a true helper to him as minister of a large congregation.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Guthrie, Donald=, Q.C., M.P.P. for South Wellington, Guelph, Ontario,
was born on the 8th May, 1840, in Edinburgh, Scotland. His father was
Hugh Guthrie, and his mother, Catharine Macgregor, sister of Patrick
Macgregor, M.A., barrister-at-law, Toronto, a distinguished Gaelic and
general scholar. Mr. Guthrie received his early education in his native
city, and, when about fourteen years of age, he left his fatherland. He
reached Toronto in August, 1854. Here he entered the office of the Hon.
Oliver Mowat, as a junior clerk; and afterwards became managing clerk
for John Helliwell, barrister. In 1859 he left Toronto and settled in
Guelph as managing clerk for Fergusson & Kingsmill, barristers. The Hon.
Fergusson-Blair, one of the partners of the firm, having retired in
December, 1863, Mr. Guthrie was admitted into partnership, and the name
of the firm was changed to Kingsmill and Guthrie. Under this style the
business was carried on until Mr. Kingsmill was appointed judge of the
County Court of Bruce, in January, 1867, when Mr. Guthrie became head of
the firm, and has continued such ever since, the firm now being known as
Guthrie and Watt. Mr. Guthrie was admitted an attorney in 1863;
barrister in 1866, passing his examinations with distinction; and, in
March, 1876, was created a Queen’s counsel by the Lieut.-Governor of
Ontario, and by the Governor-General of Canada, October, 1885. In
December, 1882, he was elected a bencher of the Law Society, and was
re-elected for five years in April, 1886. Since 1863 he has been
solicitor for the county of Wellington, and also for the same period he
has been solicitor for the city of Guelph, and acts in this capacity for
several other municipalities, banks, etc. He has been president of the
Guelph Gas Company since its incorporation in 1870; is a director of the
Guelph Junction Railway Company, and of the Wellington Hotel Company. He
occupied the position of treasurer of the St. Andrew’s Society of
Guelph, from 1862 to 1869, and in 1870 was chosen its president. Mr.
Guthrie was elected a member of the House of Commons in 1876, as
representative for South Wellington, and served until the general
election in 1878, when he presented himself for re-election, and was
returned by 303 majority. He continued in the House of Commons until the
general election of 1882, when he voluntarily retired from active
political life, with the view of devoting his whole attention for some
years to his professional duties. However, in 1886, he once more sought
parliamentary honours, and the sturdy Liberals of South Wellington sent
him to the Ontario legislature as their representative on the 28th of
December in the same year, by the handsome majority of 671. Mr. Guthrie
was selected in February, 1877, to move the reply to the speech from the
throne in the House of Commons; and on the 2nd March, 1887, he moved the
reply to the Lieut.-Governor’s address in the Ontario legislature. While
in the House of Commons—1876-78—Mr. Guthrie was a supporter of Mr.
Mackenzie’s government, and was an active member of the special
committee appointed to inquire into the affairs of the Northern Railway
Company. This committee sat for several weeks, took an immense mass of
evidence, and made an exhaustive report, which enabled the government to
secure from the railway company a large sum in place of moneys
improperly expended in elections, etc. Mr. Guthrie was also an active
member of the Committee of Privileges and Elections at the time when it
investigated the charges against Mr. Speaker Anglin, and other members,
for alleged breaches of the Independence of Parliament Act. After the
defeat of Mr. Mackenzie’s government in 1878, Mr. Guthrie, with his
political friends, went into opposition. He actively opposed the new
government on the tariff, the Letellier matter, the Canadian Pacific
Railway contract, the disallowance of the Streams Bill, the Gerrymander
Act, etc. Mr. Guthrie is a member of the Presbyterian church. On the
17th of December, 1863, he was married in Montreal to Eliza Margaret
MacVicar, youngest daughter of John MacVicar, formerly of Dunglass,
Argyleshire, Scotland, and latterly of Chatham, Ontario. Mrs. Guthrie is
a sister of the Rev. D. H. MacVicar, D.D., LL.D., principal of the
Presbyterian College, Montreal, and of the Rev. Dr. Malcolm MacVicar,
professor of theology in the Toronto Baptist College (McMaster Hall),
Toronto.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Hinson, Rev. Walter=, Pastor of the First Baptist Church, Moncton, New
Brunswick, was born at Chesham, England, on the 14th of May, 1858, and
came to Canada in 1879. His father, Thomas Hinson, and mother, Mary
Benwell, are both alive, and are residing in Hertfordshire, Eng.; he has
a brother and sister in London. Rev. Mr. Hinson was educated at Hulme
Cliff College in Derbyshire, and Harley House, East London, England. He
studied for the ministry, and was ordained in 1880. He is a member of
the Eastern New Brunswick Baptist Association, and the church of which
he is pastor is one of the most important centres of religious activity
in the district. It has a membership of between six and seven hundred,
and over four hundred scholars in its Sunday-school. For general
benevolence and Christian aggressiveness its record is good. Rev. Mr.
Hinson has always been a total abstainer, and from early youth connected
with temperance societies. He is at present a member of the Moncton
Division, Sons of Temperance, and is considered one of the most
aggressive of the temperance army in New Brunswick. Mr. Hinson was
brought up among the Baptists, and very naturally feels greatly at home
in, and is one of the leading lights of, the denomination. In the pulpit
he possesses a peculiar power, his manner and matter being forcible and
original, and we have no doubt there is a great future of usefulness
before this young and rising divine. He was married in July, 1886, to
Jennie A. Austin, of Herts, England.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Allison, Charles F.=—The late Charles F. Allison, of Sackville, New
Brunswick, who was born on the 25th of January, 1795, and died the 20th
of November, 1858, at the age of sixty-three years, was the second son
of James Allison, whose father, Joseph Allison, of Newton Limavady,
county of Londonderry, Ireland, emigrated to Nova Scotia in 1769, and
settled at Horton, Kings county, where he continued to reside until his
death in 1794. James Allison married and settled at Cornwallis, where he
lived and died at the ripe age of ninety years. Here Charles F. was
born, and received his education at the Grammar school, and in 1812
moved to Parrsboro’, where he found employment as a clerk in the
establishment of James Ratchford until 1817, when he went to Sackville,
New Brunswick, and entered into partnership with the late Hon. William
Crane, in a general mercantile business, and in this he continued until
1840. On the 4th of January, 1839, Mr. Allison addressed a letter to the
chairman of the New Brunswick district of Wesleyan ministers, in which
he proposed “to purchase an eligible site and erect suitable buildings
in Sackville, in the county of Westmoreland, for the establishment of a
school, in which not only the elementary, but the _higher_ branches of
education may be taught, and to be altogether under the management and
control of the British conference in connection with the Wesleyan
missionaries in these provinces;” and he proposed to give £100 ($400)
per annum for ten years towards the support of the school. This generous
offer having been accepted, he made arrangements to proceed with the
erection of a suitable edifice for the academy—the corner-stone of
which was laid on the 9th of July, 1840, and from that time to the close
of his life in 1858, he devoted a large share of his time and business
talent to watching over and promoting the financial interests of the
educational enterprise which, under his fostering care, developed
wonderfully. In addition to the $20,000 which he had given to establish
the older branch of the institution, he gave $4,000 to aid in the
erection of the ladies’ branch, which was opened in 1854; and in his
will he left $2,000 for the academies, and $1,000 for the college
whenever it should be organized. So that of the moderate fortune which
he had accumulated before retiring from mercantile life in 1840, at
least $30,000 were employed in founding and establishing the educational
institutions which bear his name, and which stand as the enduring
monument of the far-seeing wisdom and liberality of this unselfish
Christian patriot. Mr. Allison was married to Milcah, daughter of John
and Anne Trueman, on June 23rd, 1840. Mrs. Allison survived him, but
died on the 14th of June, 1884. Mary, their only child, was born 1st
Sept., 1847, and died 1st Jan., 1871. At the date of Mr. Allison’s
demise, _The Borderer_, a local weekly paper, thus kindly alluded to
him:

    “Our sheet this week appears in mourning, because we are called
    to record the death of one whose removal is indeed a public
    loss, and one, too, of no ordinary magnitude. Almost every
    individual in our community feels the death of Charles F.
    Allison as a public bereavement. But far beyond the circle of
    personal acquaintanceship, everywhere throughout the lower
    British American colonies, Mr. Allison’s name has been known and
    his influence felt, as the most munificent public benefactor who
    has yet arisen in these provinces, to bless his country and
    benefit the world. Mr. Allison was a native of Cornwallis, Nova
    Scotia, but came to this place when a young man, and here
    carried on, in connection with his partner, the late Hon. Wm.
    Crane, an extensive business until 1840. In all his business
    transactions he was remarkable for diligence, promptitude,
    punctuality, and rigid honesty. He did not make haste to be rich
    by embarking in any rash speculation, being, doubtlessly, more
    inclined to the _safe_ than to the _rapid_ mode of acquiring
    wealth. He was, however, quite successful, so that when he was
    led, many years since, to the more earnest consideration of the
    fundamental doctrine of the Christian system of practical
    ethics, ‘_Ye are not your own, but bought with a price_,’ etc.,
    he found 


The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Early History of English Poor Relief, by 
E. M. Leonard

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Early History of English Poor Relief

Author: E. M. Leonard

Release Date: March 26, 2019 [EBook #59129]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EARLY HISTORY OF ENGLISH POOR RELIEF ***




Produced by MWS, Christopher Wright and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









                           THE EARLY HISTORY

                                  OF

                          ENGLISH POOR RELIEF




                     London: C. J. CLAY AND SONS,
                 CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE,
                            AVE MARIA LANE.
                    Glasgow: 50, WELLINGTON STREET.

                            [Illustration]

                       Leipzig: F. A. BROCKHAUS.
                   New York: THE MACMILLAN COMPANY.
                       Bombay: E. SEYMOUR HALE.




                                  THE

                             EARLY HISTORY

                                  OF

                          ENGLISH POOR RELIEF

                                  BY

                            E. M. LEONARD,
                   FORMER STUDENT OF GIRTON COLLEGE.

                              CAMBRIDGE:
                       AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS.
                                 1900

                       [_All Rights reserved._]




                              Cambridge:
                     PRINTED BY J. AND C. F. CLAY,
                       AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS.




                                TO THE

                 REV. WILLIAM CUNNINGHAM, D.D., LL.D.
          FELLOW AND LECTURER IN TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE,

                 IN ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF MANY KINDNESSES

                         I DEDICATE THIS BOOK.




PREFACE.


The present account of the early history of English poor relief is
chiefly derived from the municipal records of London and Norwich and
from the reports of the justices of the peace which are included
amongst the state papers. Information on the subject is also contained
in the Privy Council Register, while some of the orders of both Privy
Council and justices and a few of the overseers' accounts are to be
found in the collections of the British Museum.

A fairly effectual system of relieving the destitute by public
authority has had in England a continuous existence since the
seventeenth century. Attempts to found such a system of poor relief in
the sixteenth century were common to most of the countries of Western
Europe, but the continued existence of any organisation of the kind is
peculiar to England.

Possibly this fact has an important influence on our national history.
We are apt to consider the facts that we are a law-abiding people and
that we have not suffered from violent revolutions to be entirely due
to the virtues of the national character and the excellence of the
British Constitution. But before the introduction of our system of
relieving the poor we were by no means so free from disorder. The poor
laws themselves were at least partly police measures, and, until they
were successfully administered, the country was repeatedly disturbed by
rebellions and constantly plagued by vagrants. The connection between
the relief of the poor and orderly government in England appears fully
during the course of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, and it
may be that our legal system of poor relief has ever since contributed
to the absence of violent catastrophes in our national history.

But although the continuous existence of a system of public poor
relief for nearly three centuries is peculiar to England, the English
organisation was at first only one of a series of similar systems which
began to arise during the sixteenth century in most of the countries
of Europe. Both in England and on the continent, however, poor laws
were difficult to administer. On the continent they fell gradually
into abeyance, and the English system of poor relief was by no means
enforced simply because a poor law was passed in the reign of Queen
Elizabeth. It survived almost alone among the similar organisations
of the time chiefly in consequence of the policy adopted by the Privy
Council in the reign of Charles I. and of the efforts made by English
justices of the peace as a result of that policy.

For nearly a century before the time of Charles I., however,
experiments had been made in the organisation of public poor relief.
Efforts in this direction were first undertaken by the towns, and
the provisions of the earlier English poor laws appear to have been
modelled on pre-existing municipal regulations. The City of London was
apparently the first English secular authority to organise the public
relief of the poor. Collections by the aldermen at the church doors
were decreed by the Court of Aldermen in 1532: compulsory taxation was
levied by the Common Council as early as 1547, while the Bishop and
citizens persuaded Edward VI. to grant the royal palace of Bridewell
for the creation of the first House of Correction. Before 1569
legislation also had been fashioned upon these pre-existing orders and
bye-laws of the towns, but neither statutes nor municipal orders were
successful.

Statute succeeded statute throughout the sixteenth century; during
the years 1594 to 1597, however, there was great scarcity of corn and
provisions; the poor died from starvation or rose in insurrection. The
whole question of poor relief was in consequence thoroughly thrashed
out in Parliament. Bacon and Burleigh, Whitgift and Raleigh took part
in the debates. A great committee appointed in 1597 held its meetings
in the Middle Temple Hall, and there Bacon, Coke, and the most
distinguished men in the House discussed at least thirteen bills on the
subject. This committee finally rejected all the bills referred to them
in favour of a new bill drafted by themselves which finally passed into
law. This was practically re-enacted in 1601 and has remained in force
until our own time as the basis of our organisation for the relief of
the poor.

But the question of poor relief was not settled by statutory enactment
any more than by municipal regulations. Administration and not
legislation has always been the difficulty in laws concerning the
poor. Until the end of the sixteenth century the history of relief in
England is parallel to that of France and Scotland; there were in all
three countries many poor laws but none were well administered. But
in the time of Charles I. the machinery for the execution of the law
is developed, and henceforward the history of poor relief in England
differs from that of the neighbouring countries.

The machinery for the execution of the law is created by means of
the pressure of the Privy Council on the justices of the peace. Even
in the reign of Elizabeth the Privy Council had occasionally issued
orders with the object of enforcing the poor law. But from 1629 to
1640 the Privy Council under the personal government of Charles
I. interfered constantly and regularly in the matter. The Council
attempted to provide work for the unemployed, to procure cheap corn in
years of scarcity, and to regulate wages in the supposed interests of
the workmen. It also established a new organisation for the ordinary
relief of the poor. In 1631 the justices still neglected to execute
the laws for the poor, but the Book of Orders issued in that year
ordered special meetings to be held and reports to be sent to the Privy
Council. Nearly a thousand of these reports remain, and in these we are
told that in many districts of the kingdom the execution of the law so
improved that it became part of the practice as well as of the law of
the land.

Moreover the whole of the Elizabethan Poor Law was administered: work
was provided for the unemployed, as well as pensions for the impotent.
In most places in south-eastern England, and in some districts of
almost every county, sums were levied in order that materials and
tools might be furnished to the unemployed.

Thus during the personal government of Charles I. we have not only
the first thorough execution of the poor law, but a more complete
organisation for the help of the weaker classes than at any other
period of our history.

The system thus established was successful in meeting the temporary
difficulties of the time. Some Shropshire justices worked "such effect"
by the execution of the Book of Orders that "there have not any rogues
or vagabonds appeared amongst us or walked abroad as wee heare of
since our first meetings." There were also no complaints from the
impotent poor, and the unemployed were set to work. There are similar
accounts from many different parts of the country which show that the
administration of the Poor Law had then much to do with making England
a law-abiding and orderly community.

But the outbreak of the Civil War rendered the finding of work for the
unemployed less necessary, and broke up the organisation established
by the Book of Orders. There are no reports after 1640, and probably
the special meetings of the justices were discontinued. The whole of
the poor law was laxly administered and only in a few places did this
provision for the unemployed outlast the Commonwealth. Still a part of
the poor law survived and has a continuous history from the time of
Henry VIII. In Scotland and France either the central government was
not so vigilant, or there were no efficient local officials, and in
both these countries therefore regulations for the relief of the poor
were issued but were not effectually executed. The English organisation
alone survived, and this probably in consequence of the enforcement of
the Book of Orders under the personal government of Charles I.

       *       *       *       *       *

During my investigations I have received valuable assistance. To the
Rev. Dr Cunningham of Trinity College, Cambridge, I am especially
grateful for much kindly advice and criticism. I began my researches
into this subject while I was a student of the London School of
Economics and desire to express my obligations to Mr Hewins, the
Director of the School, who first suggested the subject to me, and
also pointed out to me some of the printed sources of information. I
also thank Mr Hubert Hall of the Public Record Office for the ready
kindness with which he has always helped me. Mr Tigny of the Norwich
muniment room, Dr Sharpe of the Guildhall Record Office, and the
officials of the British Museum and Public Record Office have also
courteously assisted me while I was investigating the manuscripts under
their care. My thanks are also due to Mr S. H. Leonard of Lincoln's
Inn, Mr J. L. Burbey of Exeter College, and Miss Maud Syson of Girton
College. I desire also to express my gratitude to Mr Loch, Sec. of the
C. O. S., who, on behalf of the Syndics of the University Press, made
several suggestions of which I have been glad to avail myself.




CONTENTS.


  CHAPTER I.

  THE BEGINNING OF THE SECULAR CONTROL OF POOR RELIEF.

  § 1. Anglo-Saxon times. § 2. The Labour statutes. § 3. The control
  of charitable funds by the state. § 4. The control of charitable funds
  by the towns. § 5. Summary of the main features of public control of
  poor-relief before the sixteenth century      pp. 1-10


  CHAPTER II.

  THE CAUSES OF THE REORGANISATION OF POOR RELIEF.

  § 1. Increase of vagrants. § 2. Reasons for increase of beggars. § 3.
  Old methods of charity. § 4. Attempts to reorganise charitable funds
  on the Continent. § 5. Three factors in the making of the English
  system of poor relief      pp. 11-21


  CHAPTER III.

  1514-1569.

  POOR RELIEF IN THE TOWNS.

  § 1. Importance of municipal government in Tudor towns. § 2. London
  regulations for a constant supply of corn, 1391-1569. § 3. Regulations
  for the repression of vagrants and the relief of the poor, 1514-1536.
  § 4. Refoundation of St Bartholomew's Hospital and imposition of a
  compulsory poor rate, 1536-1547. § 5. Completion of the Four Royal
  Hospitals and establishment of a municipal system of poor relief in
  London, 1547-1557. § 6. Failure of the municipal system of London. §
  7. Provision of corn in Bristol and Canterbury. § 8. Lincoln. Survey
  of poor; and arrangements for finding work for the unemployed. §
  9. Ipswich. Survey of poor; imposition of compulsory poor rate and
  foundation of Christ's Hospital. § 10. Cambridge. Survey of poor and
  assessment of parishioners. § 11. Summary      pp. 22-46


  CHAPTER IV.

  1514-1569.

  THE PRIVY COUNCIL AND PARLIAMENT.

  § 1. Efforts made by the Government to secure the employment of the
  clothmakers during the crisis in the cloth trade of 1527-8. § 2.
  Regulations for the supply of the markets with corn, 1527-8. § 3.
  Similar action in regard to corn in 1548 and 1563. § 4. Letters of the
  Privy Council to particular local officials in connection with the
  relief of the poor. § 5. Legislation concerning the relief of the poor
  during the reign of Henry VIII. § 6. The two earlier statutes of Edward
  VI. § 7. Legislation between 1551 and 1569. § 8. Summary      pp. 47-60


  CHAPTER V.

  REVIEW OF THE GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF PUBLIC POOR
  RELIEF, 1514-1569.

  § 1. The action of municipal rulers precedes the action of Parliament.
  § 2. Advantages of the municipal system of relief. § 3. Connection
  between the municipal organisation of poor relief and the dissolution
  of the monasteries. § 4. Relation of beggary to the first schemes of
  relief. § 5. Parental government. § 6. Bridewell, the key-stone of the
  system      pp. 61-66


  CHAPTER VI.

  1569-1597.

  PARLIAMENT AND THE PRIVY COUNCIL.

  A. _Parliamentary History._ § 1. Discussions, Bills and Statutes
  between 1566 and 1576. § 2. Parliamentary history between 1576 and
  1597. § 3. The Bills and Statutes of 1597. § 4. General features of the
  discussion in Parliament. B. _The action of the Privy Council._ § 5.
  The chief characteristics of the action of the Privy Council. § 6. The
  whipping campaign. § 7. The scarcity measures. § 8. The influence of
  the Privy Council on county and municipal officials      pp. 67-94


  CHAPTER VII.

  1569-1597.

  THE MEASURES OF THE TOWNS AND THE EVENTS OF THE
  YEARS 1594-1597.

  § 1. The organisation of London with regard to the poor. § 2. The
  organisation of Norwich. § 3. The action of other towns (1) concerning
  the settlement of new comers; (2) concerning the unemployed; (3)
  concerning the raising of funds. § 4. The events of the years of
  scarcity 1594-1597. § 5. Summary of the period 1569-1597      pp. 95-131


  CHAPTER VIII.

  1597-1644.

  PARLIAMENT AND THE PRIVY COUNCIL.

  § 1. Characteristics of the period. § 2. Legislation from 1597 to 1644.
  _Administrative machinery._ § 3. Action of the Privy Council before 1629.
  § 4. Action of the Privy Council after 1629 with regard to the provision of
  corn. § 5. Action of the Privy Council after 1629 with regard to the
  unemployed. § 6. The Book of Orders as a whole and the royal commission
  of 1630/1. § 7. Interference with wages as a method of helping the poor.
  § 8. Summary      pp. 132-164


  CHAPTER IX.

  1597-1644.

  THE LOCAL MACHINERY FOR ADMINISTRATION.

  § 1. Powers of the justices. § 2. Work of the justices in first putting
  the law in execution (_a_) in the West Riding during 1598, (_b_) in
  the North Riding during the years immediately following 1605. § 3.
  Reports of the justices in response to the Book of Orders. § 4. The
  work of the judges: (_a_) Authoritative decisions on points of law;
  (_b_) Administrative work as the link between the Privy Council and
  the justices. § 5. The work of the overseers (_a_) in 1599; (_b_) when
  stirred to greater activity by scarcity measures; (_c_) after the issue
  of the Book of Orders      pp. 165-183


  CHAPTER X.

  METHODS OF RELIEF, 1597-1644.

  A. _In times of emergency._

  § 1. The methods by which the scarcity orders of the Privy Council
  were executed in 1623 and 1630-1: (_a_) the suppression of alehouses
  and restriction of malting; (_b_) the regulations for serving the
  markets with corn; (_c_) selling corn to labourers under price; (_d_)
  other methods of providing food for the poor. § 2. Evidence as to
  the success or failure of the corn regulations. § 3. Reasons for
  adopting them. § 4. Bearing of the scarcity measures on the history
  of poor relief, (_a_) because of the growth of organisation; (_b_)
  as an indication of the standard of life of the poorer classes. § 5.
  Provision of fuel for the poor in winter. § 6. Help afforded in times
  of plague and sickness. § 7. Contributions to sufferers from fire.
  § 8. Two characteristics of seventeenth century poor relief: (_a_)
  little distinction between paupers and non-paupers; (_b_) little
  distinction between relief afforded by voluntary contributions and
  that provided by poor rates      pp. 184-205

  B. _Ordinary relief._

  α. _Impotent Poor._ § 1. Almshouses and endowed
  charities. § 2. Relief for the old from county and parochial rates.
  β. _Children._ § 3. Apprenticeship. § 4. Schools for
  little children and orphanages. γ. _Able-bodied poor._
  § 5. Relief given to prisoners. § 6. Provision of funds to provide
  work for the unemployed. § 7. Methods of providing work: (_a_) Stocks
  used to employ the poor in their homes; (_b_) Introduction of new
  trades; (_c_) Workhouses and Jersey schools; (_d_) Bridewells; (_e_)
  Emigration; (_f_) Pressure on employers; (_g_) Advancement of capital
  without interest      pp. 206-236


  CHAPTER XII.

  1597-1644.

  THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE POOR LAW AS A WHOLE.

  § 1. Importance of the period 1597-1644. § 2. Negligent administration
  of the Poor Law in the North and extreme West. § 3. Administration in
  the rest of England varied with the action of the Privy Council. § 4.
  Action of the Privy Council and administration between 1597 and 1605.
  § 5. Action of the Privy Council and administration between 1605 and
  1629. § 6. Action of the Privy Council and administration between 1629
  and 1644. § 7. Improvement effected in 1631 especially concerned the
  unemployed. § 8. Detailed report from Bassetlaw. § 9. Provision for the
  unemployed (_a_) in the North and extreme West; (_b_) in the towns;
  (_c_) in the Western counties; (_d_) in the Eastern counties. § 10.
  Summary      pp. 237-266


  CHAPTER XIII.

  POOR RELIEF IN FRANCE, SCOTLAND, AND ENGLAND DURING THE
  CIVIL WAR AND COMMONWEALTH.

  § 1. Lax administration of poor relief in England during the years of
  Civil War. (_a_) Decline of charitable institutions; (_b_) Neglect
  in execution of ordinary law; (_c_) Instances of corrupt practices.
  § 2. Attempts to regain a good organisation of poor relief under the
  Commonwealth. § 3. Reasons why disorganisation especially affected the
  provision of work for the unemployed. § 4. State of poor relief after
  the Restoration. § 5. Reasons for the failure to restore the old state
  of things during the Commonwealth. § 6. History of legislation on
  poor relief in Scotland (_a_) before 1597; (_b_) between 1597-1680.
  § 7. Failure of administration of poor relief in Scotland during the
  seventeenth century. (_a_) Responses of the Scotch justices to the
  orders of Council in 1623 show that they were unable or unwilling to
  enforce the Poor Law themselves, and left it to the kirk sessions;
  (_b_) Inadequate poor relief granted by the kirk sessions of Banff;
  (_c_) Relief of the poor in Aberdeen shows that the relief considered
  sufficient by the municipal rulers was double that which could be
  granted from the funds at the disposal of the kirk sessions; (_d_)
  Infrequency of assessment in Scotland before 1818; (_e_) Insufficiency
  of relief during the years 1692-1699; (_f_) Prevalence of begging in
  Scotland; (_g_) Reasons for the failure of Scotch administration. §
  8. The history of poor relief in France. § 9. Comparison between the
  history of poor relief in England and that in France and in Scotland
      pp. 267-292


  CHAPTER XIV.

  CONCLUSIONS.

  § 1. Summary of history of English poor relief before the Civil
  War. § 2. The political significance of the paternal measures of
  the Government. (_a_) Possible attempt to attach to the Government
  the poorer part of the nation; (_b_) Habitual use of proclamations
  and orders in Council for a popular purpose. § 3. Success of the
  enforcement of the Book of Orders in the reign of Charles I. § 4.
  Results of the effectual administration of the Poor Law on English
  social history      pp. 293-304


APPENDICES.


  APPENDIX I. Extracts from the Journals of the Common Council of London.

  A. Copy of a precept issued for a collection for the poor issued
  in 1563. _Journals_ XVIII. f. 145 b      p. 305

  B. Copy in the Journals of a precept for a collection in February
  1573/4. _Journals_ XX. I. f. 119      pp. 306-307


  APPENDIX II. Extract from the census of the poor taken at Norwich
  recorded in the "Maioris Bocke for the Pore"      pp. 308-310


  APPENDIX III. Extracts from the "Orders for the poor" drawn up in
  Norwich, May 1571:      pp. 311-315

  Orders for the poor, p. 311; for the balie of Bridewell, p. 312;
  orders for children and others in wardes, p. 313; orders for the
  deacons, p. 314. _The Book for the Poore_, Norwich.


  APPENDIX IV. Report concerning scarcity from Norfolk, 1586. _Dom.
  State Papers Queen Eliz._, Vol. 191, No. 12      pp. 316-317


  APPENDIX V. Part of a draft of orders for remedying the scarcity of
  corn in 1586. _Lans. MSS. Brit. Mus._ No. 48, f. 128      pp. 318-326


  APPENDIX VI. Accounts of the Churchwardens and Overseers of the parish
  of Staplegrove, co. Somerset, for the year 1599. _Brit. Mus. Add. MSS._
  30,278      pp. 327-330


  APPENDIX VII. Orders made by the justices responsible for Aylesham and
  Reipham, co. Norfolk, 23rd October 1622. _Brit. Mus. Add. MSS._ No.
  12496, f. 222      pp. 331-333


  APPENDIX VIII. Report of the justices from Lackford and the half
  hundred of Exning, February 7th, 1622/3. _Dom. State Papers James I._,
  Vol. 142. 14. I      pp. 334-335


  APPENDIX IX. Extract from the Privy Council Register. Copy of a letter
  sent to the Deputy Lieutenants and Justices of the Counties of Suffolk
  and Essex concerning the employment of the Poor. _Privy Council
  Register Chas. I._, Vol. V. f. 263. 22nd May 1629      pp. 336-337


  APPENDIX X. Letter concerning the restoration of order and relief of
  the poor in Rutland. _Privy Council Register_, Vol. VI. f. 345. 15th
  Feb. 1630/1      pp. 338-339


  APPENDIX XI. Letter from Sir Thomas Barrington concerning the eight
  hundreds of Yorkshire. Vol. 177, No. 31. 21st Dec. 1630      pp. 340-341


  APPENDIX XII. Justices' reports on the execution of the Book of Orders
  of January 1630/1      p. 342

  A. _Dom. State Papers Chas. I._, Vol. 188, No. 85. Question asked by
  the justices responsible for the division of Fawley, Hants.      pp. 342-344

  B. _Dom. State Papers Chas. I._, Vol. 189, No. 80 and Vol. 197, No.
  69. Extracts from two reports from the hundred of Braughing concerning
  proceedings from Feb. 7th 1630/1 to June 27th, 1631      pp. 344-351

  C. _Dom. State Papers Chas. I._, Vol. 190, No. 10. Part of the Report
  of Bridewell, 2nd May 1631      pp. 351-356

  D. _Dom. State Papers Chas. I._, Vol. 191, No. 42. Report concerning
  Guildford, 7th May 1631      pp. 357-358

  E. _Dom. State Papers Chas. I._, Vol. 216, No. 45. Report of the
  justices of Cambridge for the Hundreds of Chesterton, Papworth and
  North Stow, May 13, 1632      pp. 358-360

  F. _Dom. State Papers Chas. I._, Vol. 226, No. 78. Part of the
  certificate of the justices of Middlesex for the Finsbury division
  concerning the sums received from penalties levied on alehouse keepers
  in 1630, 1631, 1632      pp. 360-361

  G. _Dom. State Papers Chas. I._, Vol. 349, No. 86. Part of the
  certificate from Bassetlaw, co. Notts., 10th March 1636/7      pp. 361-365

  H. _Dom. State Papers Chas. I._, Vol. 395, No. 55. Certificate
  concerning the Book of Orders from Loes, Wilford, Thredling and
  Plomesgate, 14 July 1638      pp. 365-366


  APPENDIX XIII. The division of the monies collected for the poor
  January 1642/3 in Norwich. _Add MSS. Brit. Mus._ No. 22619, f. 11
        pp. 367-368


  APPENDIX XIV. Report of the Four Royal Hospitals, 1645. _King's
  Pamphlets_ 669, f. 10, No. 2      pp. 369-370


  APPENDIX XV. Ordinance of the Lords for putting in execution the laws
  for the relief of the poor. _King's Pamphlets_ 669, f. 9, No. 81
        p. 371




ERRATA AND CORRIGENDA.


P. 50, n. 4. _For_ Amysbury _read_ Amesbury, _for_ Boscum _read_
Boscombe, _for_ Alyngton _read_ Allington and _for_ Fiddelldene _read_
Figheldean.

P. 102, n. 1, p. 106, n. 2, p. 142, n. 3 _for_ Maiores Booke for the
Poore _read_ Maioris Bocke for the Pore.

P. 118, l. 18. _For_ Twiford _read_ Twyford.

P. 168, l. 10. _For_ Arkesey _read_ Arksey.

P. 169, n. 3. _For_ Dewisburie _read_ Dewsbury, _for_ Shelfe _read_
Shelf, and _for_ Northowrom _read_ Northowram.

P. 170, n. 2. _For_ Thirske _read_ Thirsk.

P. 173, l. 22. _For_ Fropfield _read_ Froxfield.

P. 214, n. 2. _For_ Easbie _read_ Easby.


NOTE. P. 141, n. 1. The decision of Lord Romer was reversed by the
Court of Appeal on March 7th, 1900; it was decided that the Guardians
were not entitled to relieve the colliers during a strike.




THE EARLY HISTORY OF ENGLISH POOR RELIEF.




CHAPTER I.

THE BEGINNING OF THE SECULAR CONTROL OF POOR RELIEF.

  1. Anglo-Saxon times.
  2. The Labour Statutes.
  3. The regulation of charitable funds by the state.
  4. The control of charitable funds by the towns.
  5. Summary of the main features of public control of poor relief
before the sixteenth century.


[Sidenote: Introduction.]

The English system of Poor Relief presents a striking contrast to the
rest of our national institutions. In most departments of our social
organisation, public control is less extensive in England than in the
other countries of Western Europe. But, in regard to the relief of the
poor, we have adopted an opposite policy. Since the reign of Charles
I., Englishmen have made themselves responsible for the maintenance of
those who are destitute. All, who cannot obtain food or shelter for
themselves or from their nearest relatives, have a right to relief from
compulsory rates levied upon the rest of the community.

It will be our object, in the following pages, to trace the growth
of this system. We will examine the causes which led the public
authorities of state and town to control the relief of the poor, and
the steps which they took to render its administration effective and
successful. There can be no doubt, that an organisation of this kind
was not suddenly imposed by a single Act of Parliament. Under Henry
VIII., the first enactment was passed ordering the regular collection
and distribution of alms for the relief of the poor[1], but it was not
until forty years later that the amount to be paid by each individual
was assessed and its payment compulsorily enforced[2], while even
after ninety years had elapsed, the English organisation of poor
relief was still irregularly carried out and of little practical
effect[3]. Like other and more famous English institutions, the
making and administration of the English Poor Law was a growth, not a
creation. It was during the sixteenth and early part of the seventeenth
centuries that the chief experiments were made in methods of relieving
the poor by secular public authorities. But, even before that time,
the beginnings of the later organisation may be traced both in the
provisions of the statutes and in the regulations of the towns.

[1] 27 Hen. VIII. c. 25, 1535-6.

[2] 14 Eliz. c. 5, 1572.

[3] Preamble to Orders and Directions of 1631.

[Sidenote: 1. Anglo-Saxon times.]

We will now briefly consider the chief ways in which public secular
authorities interfered in the relief of the poor before the sixteenth
century. In Anglo-Saxon times, the administration of poor relief
was almost entirely under the control of the Church. Almsgiving and
hospitality were however inculcated as religious duties of considerable
importance, and there is much to make us think that they were
extensively practised by Anglo-Saxon kings and noblemen. Bede tells
the following story of King Oswald. He was about to dine sumptuously
from a silver dish of dainties one Easter day, when the servant who
distributed relief to the poor came before him, and told him that there
were many needy persons outside the gate, who were begging some alms
of the king. The king left the dish untasted and ordered the contents
to be carried to the beggars[4]. This story incidentally lets us see
that a distribution of alms and a special servant for the purpose were
part of the regular organisation of the household. King Alfred also, we
are told, "bestowed alms and largesses on both natives and foreigners
of all countries[5]," and it was the custom of the Anglo-Saxon kings
to keep open house for several days and to entertain all comers three
times a year, at Christmas, Easter and Whitsuntide.

[4] Bede's _Eccles. Hist._, Bk. III. c. VI. King Athelstan ordered the
distribution of much help to the poor. He ordered each of his reeves
every year to redeem one "wite theow" (penal slave) and to entirely
feed one poor Englishman. Thorpe, p. 84.

[5] Asser, Bohn, p. 68.

But the greater part of the relief of the time was administered by
ecclesiastics. Some help was given to the poor in famous abbeys
like those of Ely, Croyland and Glastonbury[6], and there were the
offerings distributed by the priests. The nearest approach we have to
state interference with the relief of the poor is found in the law of
Ethelred, which probably enforced the existing custom with regard to
tithe. One third part "of the tithe which belonged to the Church" was
to be given to "Gods poor and needy men in thraldom[7]."

[6] Athelstan the Atheling gave lands to Ely on condition that they
fed a hundred poor men on his anniversary at the expense of his heirs.
Kemble, _The Saxons in England_, II. p. 510.

[7] _Ib._ p. 545. Eadgar, Archbishop of York, and Aelfric in the canons
which bear his name both order the same proportion of tithe to be set
aside for the poor. Thorpe, pp. 326 and 345.

But, from the beginning of the thirteenth century, we find greater
activity in the matter. Two causes seem to have influenced the secular
public authorities of the time to interfere; first, the desire to
repress vagrants, and secondly, the wish of state and town to control
some of the charitable endowments.

[Sidenote: 2. Labour statutes.]

Many of the regulations, made with the object of repressing vagrants
and able-bodied beggars, were closely connected with the statutes
concerning labour, enacted from the middle of the fourteenth century
onwards.

After the Black Death of 1348-9, labourers were scarce and wages rose
rapidly; a series of enactments was therefore passed, designed to force
every able-bodied man to work, and to keep wages at the old level.

In the first regulation of this kind, the Ordinance of Labourers of
1349, the first step is taken towards the national control of poor
relief. The proclamation restrains the liberty of the giver; the
private individual may no longer give to whom he chooses. It is
provided that no one is to give relief to able-bodied beggars, and the
ground of the prohibition is expressly stated to be "that they may be
compelled to labour for their necessary living."

The first provision of funds for the relief of the poor made by law,
is embodied in one of the same series of labour statutes. The wages
of priests were regulated and it was ordered that the fines of those
parishioners who paid more than the statutory rate, should be given to
the poor[8].

[8] 36 Edw. III. c. 8.

Almost as soon as these labour statutes were passed, we hear that
labourers fled from county to county in order to elude the operation
of the law[9]. The workmen adopted many devices, in order to escape
from any part of the country where these regulations were enforced.
Some seem to have pretended to be crippled and diseased, and so, when
undetected, could wander and beg with impunity. Others, apparently,
joined bands of pilgrims, like the famous travellers from the Tabard to
Canterbury, and, journeying with them, would reach a district, where
they could obtain good wages and be undisturbed by the execution of the
labour laws. In 1388, therefore, regulations were made, restricting the
movements, not only of able-bodied beggars, but of all beggars and of
all labourers and, at the same time, admitting the right to relief of
those who were unable to work for themselves[10]. Servants who wished
to depart from the hundred in which they lived, under colour of going
a pilgrimage, or in order to serve or dwell elsewhere, were to have
a letter, stating the cause of their journey and the time when they
were to return, duly signed by the "good man of the hundred" appointed
for the purpose. If they were found away from their district, without
a letter of this kind, they were to be placed in the stocks and kept
there, until they found surety to return to their own neighbourhood.
However, a servant who had a certain engagement with a master in
another part of the country, was always to be allowed to have a
letter, allowing him freely to depart. Thus the statute prevented a
man from wandering about in search of work, but did not prevent him
from migrating, when an engagement was already concluded. All these
regulations affected beggars: an able-bodied beggar who begged without
a letter was to be put in the stocks in the same manner as a labourer
without a letter. He could not escape by pretending that he was a
labourer, because both were liable to punishment. Neither could he
elude the vigilance of the law, by pretending to be disabled, because
the impotent poor also were forbidden to wander; they were to stay
where they were at the passing of the Act, or, if the people there were
unable to support them, were to go, within forty days, to other towns
in the same hundred or to the place where they were born.

[9] _Rolls of Parliament_, 46 Edw. III. II. p. 312. Petition of the
Commons.

[10] 12 Richard II. c. 3 and c. 7.

This statute is often regarded as the first English poor law, because
it recognises that the impotent poor had a right to relief, and because
it carefully distinguishes between them and the able-bodied beggars.
The provisions also imply the responsibility of every neighbourhood for
the support of its own poor. Moreover, this enactment may be regarded
as a law of settlement. Not only were the impotent poor confined
to their own district, but all unlicensed labourers were likewise
forbidden to migrate. Probably the Act had little effect because it was
too stringent to have been enforced.

Not only Parliament, but the municipal rulers also, made regulations
for the restraint of vagabonds. The authorities of the City of London,
in 1359 and in 1375, forbade any able-bodied person to beg, and at the
end of the fifteenth century the constables were ordered to search,
not only for the vagabonds themselves, but also for the people who
harboured them[11].

[11] Riley's _Memorials of London_, pp. 304, 390.

Two statutes relating to beggars and vagabonds were passed in the reign
of Henry VII.[12], but in both the severity of the punishment was
decreased, because the king wished by "softer meanes" to reduce them
to obedience. The decrease in the severity of this punishment seems to
show that there was as yet little sign of the crowds of vagrants, who
were a terror to the country under Henry VIII. So far the wanderers
were men who had no difficulty in obtaining work, but who wanted
better terms. Under Henry VIII. they include also unemployed labourers,
and the legislation dealing with them concerns the provision of work
for the able-bodied as well as assistance for the impotent poor; still
the regulations concerning vagrants were already connected with the
relief of the poor because the efforts made to keep at work the valiant
beggars had made it necessary to distinguish between them and the old
and disabled, and had led to some provision being made for those really
unable to help themselves.

[12] 11 Hen. VII. c. 2, 19 Hen. VII. c. 12.

[Sidenote: 3. Control of charitable endowments by the State.]

But there was another cause for the public regulation of the relief of
the necessitous. From the thirteenth century onwards there are signs
that men had ceased to leave charitable endowments entirely in the
hands of ecclesiastics. A growing desire was felt, that Parliament and
Town Governments should share in the administration of some of the
funds for the relief of the poor.

We find indications of this both in the statutes and in the action
of the burgesses. Almost at the same time that the statute of 1388
ordered beggars to remain in their own neighbourhood, another statute
of Richard II. was passed which regulated the revenues of the Church
in the interests of the poor. A portion of the tithe had been commonly
distributed by the resident rector to the poor[13], but, when a living
became part of the possessions of a monastery, the poor parishioners
were often forgotten. In order therefore that the parishioners might
not be injured, this enactment provided that when the revenues of a
living were appropriated by a monastery, a portion of the revenue
should be assigned to the poor, so that they might not lose the
alms formerly distributed by the rectors[14]. Under Henry IV. this
statute was re-enacted, and it was ordered that appropriations made
since the 15 Rich. II. should be reformed[15]. The earlier statute
had thus probably not been well observed: the second was apparently
more successful, for in _The Complaynt of Roderyck Mors_, written in
1542, it is stated that "if the personage were improperd, the monkes
were bound to deale almesse to the poore and to kepe hospitalyte as
the writings of the gyftes of such personages and landes do playnly
declare[16]." In any case this legislation indicates a desire on the
part of the state to interfere, in order to reform the administration
of ecclesiastical revenues in the interest of the poor.

[13] The following incident in the reign of Edward II. shows us the
bishop interfering in order to enforce the distribution to the poor
of part of the revenue of a church. Richard, Bishop of Durham, in
the course of the visitation of his diocese, came to the parish of
Wessington. The people there complained that hospitality was not shown
by the Church and that alms were not given to the poor. The bishop
therefore ordered that a portion of the revenue should be given to the
poor, and especially set aside the tithes of the new assarts of Sir
Walter de Wessington for this purpose. _Hist. Man. Com._, MSS. of J. R.
Ormsby, Esq., 1020 B. The statutes of Richard II. and Henry IV. seem to
have aimed at doing exactly what the Bishop did at Wessington, whenever
a living was impropriated by a monastery.

[14] 15 Rich. II. c. 6.

[15] 4 Hen. IV. c. 12.

[16] _The Complaynt of Roderyck Mors_, E. E. T. S., p. 33.

[Sidenote: 4. Control of charitable endowments by the town.]

In the towns also, the civic governors and the guilds began to control
some of the endowments for the relief of the poor. Even in Anglo-Saxon
times, the distribution of alms formed part of the functions of the
guilds, and it is not unlikely that it was partly owing to customs
formed by the municipal rulers through their association in guilds
that the towns began to take an active part in the administration of
poor relief. Thus at Lynn, one of the ordinances of the town guild
provided that relief should be given to any brother in poverty,
either from the common fund or from the private purses of the guild
brothers. A piece of land was bequeathed to the guild, partly for
the purpose of relieving the poor, and, we are told, £30 a year was
distributed to the poor brethren, to blind, lame and sick persons,
and for other charitable purposes. The whole charity distributed by
this association must have been considerable, for though only four
great meetings of the guild were held during the year, one of these
was especially concerned with the management of its charities[17]. At
Sandwich also[18], the burgesses or the town rulers controlled the two
hospitals dedicated respectively to St Bartholomew and St John. Both
were virtually almshouses providing for a certain number of old people.
The Mayor and Jurats of Sandwich, not only appointed the governors of
St Bartholomew's, but audited the accounts, controlled the management
and appointed new recipients of the charity. The whole was connected
with an annual festal procession to the hospital in which many of the
townsfolk took part[19].

[17] C. Gross, _The Gild Merchant_, vol. II. pp. 159-161.

[18] Boy's _History of Sandwich_, pp. 3 and 127. The references to this
and several of the following examples of municipal action are quoted by
Mrs Green, _Town Life in the Fifteenth Century_, vol. I. p. 41, note 2.

[19] In Hereford also, St Giles' and the Sick Man's hospital were
governed by the Corporation from the time of Rich. II. (_Reports of
Char. Com._), and in Exeter, the town rulers at one time exercised
rights over St Mary Magdalen's hospital, and afterwards exchanged these
for power over St John's hospital for lepers. Freeman's _Exeter_, pp.
68, 174, etc.

At other times, the municipalities, not only exercised control over
institutions founded by private people, but also themselves contributed
to the endowments. At Scarborough, Henry de Bulmer gave a site for St
Thomas hospital which was finished and endowed by the burgesses[20]. At
Chester the town gave land, on condition that certain almshouses were
built[21]; and Ipswich in 1469 granted the profits of St James' fair
to the lazars[22]. At Lydd, sums were given for "Goderynges dowghetyr,
pour mayde, for hosyne, shoys and other thyngses" and payments were
made for her clothes and keep on several occasions[23]. In this town
also gifts of corn were regularly distributed at Easter and Christmas
from 1439 onwards[24]. In most of the great towns the Chamberlain
was the especial guardian of orphans[25], and sometimes there was a
Court of Orphans in which matters affecting the property of orphans
were managed. The arrangement rather concerned orphans with property,
than the poor, but still it shows that the municipality recognised a
responsibility with regard to a helpless class of the community.

[20] Tanner's _Notitia_, Yorkshire, CVI. The burgesses of Scarborough
are said to have founded and maintained another hospital, dedicated to
St Nicholas, and in both poor men and women were maintained.

[21] _Hist. Man. Com._, Rep. VIII. p. 371. 24 Hen. VII.

[22] Nathaniell Bacon's _Annalls of Ipswiche_, p. 129. In Rye also
payments were made to the poor from municipal funds as early as 1474.
_Hist. Man. Com._ V. p. 494.

[23] _Hist. Man. Com._ V. 527. In 1482-3, 3_s._ 4_d._ was paid to
Thomas Maykyne "to kepe Goderyng's doughtyr," and in 1485 there is
another entry of the same kind, "Paid for a kertylcloth for Herry
Goderyng's doughtyr and for making thereof, 3_s._ 1_d._"

[24] Payments in connection with this distribution of corn continue to
be mentioned, down to the end of an account book containing municipal
accounts from the beginning of the fifteenth century until the reign of
Richard III. _Hist. Man. Com._ V. 519.

[25] London had a regular Court of Orphans: see also _Southampton_,
John S. Davies, p. 159, and _Exeter_, Freeman, p. 154.

The municipal authorities at Southampton, however, undertook much more
extensive measures for preventing want, and it is interesting to notice
that this action was very probably undertaken in consequence of the
customs of the ruling guild. In ordinances at least as early as the
fourteenth century forfeits and alms were awarded to the poor, and
members were to be assisted when in poverty. In the fifteenth century
"the townys almys were settled on a plan," and lists were kept of the
weekly payments. The Steward's book of 1441 states that the town gave
weekly to the poor £4. 2_s._ 1_d._ which, according to the value of
money at the time, might have furnished relief for about one hundred
and fifty people[26].

[26] John S. Davies, _Southampton_, pp. 139, 294, and C. Gross, _The
Gild Merchant_, vol. II. p. 231.

[Sidenote: 5. Summary.]

Thus, before the sixteenth century, state and town had begun to make
regulations for the relief of the poor. Some of these regulations were
dictated by a desire to repress vagrants. They were closely connected
with the enforcement of the labour legislation of the time, and were
embodied in the same statutes, and administered by the same officials.
But other provisions were due to the fact that there was a growing
tendency for the state to interfere to prevent the maladministration
of ecclesiastical revenues, and for non-ecclesiastical bodies to
undertake the administration of charity. Still, before the sixteenth
century, most of these measures were negative rather than positive. The
orders concerning the repression of sturdy beggars were more prominent
than those concerning the relief of the poor. The latter were as yet
infrequent and had little practical effect. The main part of the
charity of the time was still administered by ecclesiastics and was
obtained from endowed charities and from voluntary gifts.

But, in the sixteenth century, the older methods of relief failed to
cope with the new social difficulties, and the older feeling in favour
of the ecclesiastical control of charity was considerably lessened.
At the same time, the tendencies that already led to the management
of relief by public secular authorities were accentuated. During the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, therefore, the organisation of
poor relief was more and more undertaken by municipality and state, and
the English system of poor relief was created and first administered.




CHAPTER II.

THE CAUSES OF THE REORGANISATION OF POOR RELIEF.

  1. Increase of vagrants. (1) Harman's description of vagrants in
England. (2) Bands of vagrants on the Continent.
  2. Reasons why men became beggars. (1) The destruction of the
feudal system destroyed employments furnished by war and service.
(2) Manufactures on a large scale less stable than old occupations.
(3) Rise of prices affected food earlier than wages. (4) In England
enclosures were made because sheep were more profitable than corn.
  3. Old methods of charity. (1) Private individuals. (2) Monasteries.
(3) Hospitals.
  4. Attempts at reorganisation on the Continent.
  5. Three factors in making of English poor relief: (1) the orders of
the towns; (2) the regulations of the statutes; (3) the efforts of the
Privy Council to secure the administration of adequate relief. Three
periods in the history of the first making of the English system: (1)
1514-1569; (2) 1569-1597; (3) 1597-1644.


The earlier years of the sixteenth century began a period of great
changes in the position of the poorer classes, and these changes soon
resulted in a series of attempts to reform and reorganise the whole
system of poor relief.

[Sidenote: 1. Increase of vagrants.]

[Sidenote: (1) Harman's description of the bands of vagrants in England.]

The desire to repress vagrants had already led state and town to make
regulations concerning the relief of the poor, but whereas, before
the sixteenth century, beggars were only an occasional nuisance,
they now became a chronic plague. The great increase in the numbers
of these vagabonds appears to have begun early in the reign of Henry
VIII. Thomas Harman, a gentleman of Kent, in about 1566, wrote an
elaborate description of twenty-three varieties whom he had found
to be in existence[27]. One of his anecdotes shows that they were
already numerous soon after the execution of the Duke of Buckingham in
1521[28]. A man of some importance, he states, died about this time,
and crowds of beggars attended the funeral. Some of them were poor
householders and these returned to their homes at night. But the others
were sheltered in a large barn which, on being searched, was found to
contain seven-score men and at least as many women. The bands of these
wanderers continued to increase, for Harrison, in his _Description of
England_, tells us, "it is not yet full threescore yeares since this
trade began: but how it has prospered since that time it is easie to
judge, for they are now supposed, of one sex and another, to amount to
above 10,000 persons[29]."

[27] Thomas Harman, _Caueat or Warening for Common Cursetors_. The
second edition bears date 1567.

[28] Vagrants were already numerous when Sir Thomas More wrote
_Utopia_, c. 1516.

[29] W. Harrison's _Description of England_, edition of 1587, edited by
F. J. Furnivall, vol. I. p. 218.

Harman's description of this "rowsey ragged rabblement of rakehelles"
shows that some sort of organisation existed amongst them. He prints a
slang dictionary of thieves' language, and states that this had been in
existence for thirty years: he also gives an account of their order of
precedence, thus showing that many degrees of roguery were recognised
by the rogues themselves.

We can see from his account of their pranks, that they were both
cunning and daring, and were often a great hardship to the honest
citizens of the poorer classes.

Not only did they break into houses by night and pilfer the pigs and
the poultry, but they were daring enough to pass a hook through the
windows and draw the clothes off sleeping men; to rob men on the
highway who were travelling home from fairs, and to come by night to
lonely houses and force the owners to deliver up what money they had on
the premises. Harman's tale on this point may illustrate the dangers of
the situation.

One night two rogues went to an inn, and sat down and drank merrily,
offering the pot to those of the company they fancied. Amongst others,
a priest was there, and when he had gone they began to make inquiries
of the hostess concerning him, saying they were nephews of a priest in
this neighbourhood and had not seen him since they were six years old.
She, suspecting no harm, gave them all the information they wanted;
told them the parson kept little company and had but one woman and a
boy in the house. The thieves departed with the intention of robbing so
defenceless a prey, but they found that his house was built of stone
and his windows and doors well fastened. They thought force would avail
little, and therefore tried fraud. One of the rogues, with piteous
moans, asked for relief, and the parson, being moved by his distress,
put his arm out of window to give him twopence. The rascal seized, not
the twopence, but the priest's hand, and his companion secured his
wrist also, so that their victim could not liberate himself at all.
The rogues demanded three pounds and succeeded in obtaining four marks
which was all the poor man had in the house. They bound him, therefore,
also to drink twelve pence next day at the inn and to thank the good
wife for the cheer they had had. The unfortunate parson could only use
"contentacion for his remedy," but he kept his promise, and the hostess
persuaded him to say no more of it "lest when they shal understand of
it in the parish they wyll but laugh you to skorne[30]."

[30] Harman's _Caueat_ (E. E. T. S., Extra Series, No. ix.).

[Sidenote: (2) Vagrants on the Continent.]

This plague of vagrants was not, however, peculiar to England, but
arose about the same time in all the countries of Western Europe. A
book that somewhat resembled Harman's appeared in Germany as early
as 1514[31]; this contained both an account of the different orders
of vagabonds and also a "Canting Dictionary." Martin Luther often
discussed the subject of beggars, and in 1528, wrote a preface to this
very book[32]. In Germany, therefore, the increase in the number of
beggars seems to be even earlier than in England. In Scotland and the
towns of the Netherlands the statutes and town ordinances show us that
the same trouble assailed them about the same time, and France in
1516 was already troubled by large numbers of discharged or wandering
soldiers[33].

[31] _Liber Vagatorum._ Luther thought that begging ought to be
prohibited altogether and the poor provided for by the inhabitants
or from ecclesiastical revenues. See his manifesto "To the Christian
nobility of the German nation," 1520, and the "Regulation of a Common
Chest" quoted by Ashley, _Economic History_, II. p. 342.

[32] Preface to Harman's _Caueat_, E. E. T. S., p. 1.

[33] More's _Utopia_, p. 36, Pitt Press ed. "Yet Fraunce ... is
troubled and infected with a much sorer plage. The whole royalme is
fylled and besieged with hiered souldiers in peace tyme."

[Sidenote: 2. Causes for the existence of these bands of beggars.]

[Sidenote: (1) The break-up of the feudal system and consequent
lessening of employment in war and service.]

As these bands of vagrants were found in so many countries at once, the
principal causes for their existence cannot be peculiar to England, or
to any one country, but must be common to all the countries affected.
It was closely connected with lack of employment: the difficulty had
been for the masters to find workmen, the problem was now for the men
to find work, and this in spite of the fact that at the beginning
of the sixteenth century commerce and manufactures were rapidly
extending. The age was a time of transition, and old occupations were
becoming unnecessary. The feudal society of the Middle Ages was giving
place to the modern industrial and commercial community. War, public
and private, and service with great nobles had formerly occupied
large numbers of the male population. But the fifteenth century had
witnessed the growth of central authorities strong enough to preserve
order and to control the power of the great lords. In Germany, the
towns were growing in importance and had often become independent of
feudal superiors; in France, Louis XI. had overcome the last serious
opposition of the French barons to the growth of the royal authority,
while in England, the Wars of the Roses and the policy of Henry VII.
had combined to break the power of the English nobility. Order had
given place to disorder, lawsuits had succeeded private wars. The power
of the nobles was no longer maintained by force; they had no longer the
need of many followers to fight their battles. The oft-quoted saying
of the chieftain with reference to the Highlands in the last century
might be applied with little variation to the position of the nobles
under Henry VIII. "When I was a young man the point upon which every
Highland gentleman rested his importance, was the number of men whom
his estate could support, the question next rested on the amount of his
stock of black cattle, it is now come to respect the number of sheep
and I suppose our posterity will inquire how many rats and mice an
estate will produce[34]." Power in the Highlands then, and in England
at the beginning of the sixteenth century, passed from the leaders of
men to the holders of wealth. This revolution in the basis of power
had a considerable effect upon the labour market. The chief occupation
of the Middle Ages had become unnecessary; men whom the nobles had
formerly been glad to enlist had now to seek other means of earning a
livelihood. Moreover, the employment which had now disappeared was one
which especially afforded an outlet for men of restless character, the
kind of people who under adverse conditions became the sturdy vagabonds
of the sixteenth century. Sir Thomas More expressly states that the
English thieves of the time were often discharged retainers[35], and
many of the later idlers would doubtless be men who would have followed
this occupation, if it had been open to them before they took to their
wandering life.

[34] _Tales of a Grandfather_, last chapter, Sir W. Scott.

[35] _Utopia_, p. 30, "They that be thus destitute of service, either
starve for honger or manfullye playe the thieves."

[Sidenote: (2) Manufactures on a large scale less stable than old
occupations.]

No doubt the growing commerce and manufactures afforded employment in
course of time to many more than those now displaced by the decrease
of private and public war, but this very increase of manufacturing
industry had effects of its own in increasing the numbers of the
unemployed. In the first place, the peaceful life of the craftsman was
favourable to the growth of population, and in the second place, the
new occupations were less stable than the old industries had been.
The simple manufactures necessary for the home market varied little;
in bad times the craftsman might get a little less work, but he was
not thrown utterly out of employment. But after great manufacturing
centres came into existence and their produce began to be exported to
other lands, the inhabitants of whole districts would have little or no
work through no fault of their own. The great English manufacture of
the time was cloth, and crises in this trade occurred both when Wolsey
wanted to make war on the Netherlands and when the merchants wished to
prevent the exactions of Charles I. We shall see that the misery of the
inhabitants in the English cloth-making districts had much to do with
stimulating the growth of an administrative system for poor relief.

[Sidenote: (3) Rise of prices affecting food earlier than wages.]

Later on in the sixteenth century, another cause tended to increase
the hardships of the poor, and so necessitated new methods of poor
relief. The influx of silver from the New World caused a general rise
of prices. Food and clothing and rents rose more quickly than wages, so
that the poor could obtain fewer of the necessaries of life[36]. The
debasements of the English coinage, by Henry VIII. in 1527, 1543, 1545
and 1546, and by Edward VI. in 1551, still further increased this evil
in England, and during the transition the poorer classes must have been
the chief sufferers.

[36] Between 1511 and 1550 provisions seem to have risen about 60 p.c.
in price, and there is a further rise in the next ten years of another
fifty p.c.

              Wheat the
               quarter.      Barley.      Oxen.      Hens.    Herrings.

              _s._ _d._     _s._ _d._    _s._ _d._   _d._     _s._ _d._

  1511-1520    6    8¾       4   0¼       23    2     2        6    0¾

  1521-1530    7    6        4   9        30   10¼    3½       6    7¼

  1531-1540    7   8½        4   11¾      28    7½    3¼       6    8

  1541-1550   10   8         6   2¼       42    3¼    5¾      10    3

  1551-1560   15   3¾       10   0¼       78    7½    4¾      11    0½

The rise in wages was barely 15 p.c. before 1550, though during the
next ten years there is a rise of 30 p.c., so that the rise in wages is
less than half that in the price of provisions.

             Carpenter,            Mason's  Sawyers,                                     Unskilled
              average.   Mason.  labourer.   pair.    Tiler.  Thatcher.  Man.  Plumber.   labour.

                _d._      _d._      _d._   _s._ _d._   _d._      _d._    _d._    _d._      _d._

  1511-1520      6¼     6         4      1    0      6         5¼   4       6         3¾

  1521-1530      6         6¼     4¼  1    0½  6         6       4       6½     4⅛

  1531-1540      7         6¾     4¼  1    0½  6½     7       4½   7         4

  1541-1550      7         6¾     4¾  1    1½  7½     6½   4½   7½     4⅝

  1551-1560     10¾    10         6¾  1    5      9¼      --     6¼   8½     6

  _Hist. of Agric. and Prices_, vol. IV. pp. 292, 355, 545, and 524.

The effects following the break-up of the feudal system, the increase
of manufactures, and the rise of prices owing to the influx of silver
were in no way peculiar to England: they account quite as much for the
bands of vagrants on the Continent as for those of this country.

[Sidenote: (4) In England sheep were more profitable than corn.]

But one cause of distress affected England more than the other
countries of Europe. It had become more profitable to breed sheep than
to plough the land, and England was the great wool-producing country of
the world. Men, who had cultivated the soil, were evicted in order that
sheep-runs might be formed, and thus agricultural labourers and small
yeomen helped to swell the crowds of the unemployed.

[Sidenote: 3. Old methods of charity:]

The existence therefore of the crowd of vagrants can be accounted for
by the social and economic changes of the time, but it was none the
less dangerous on that account. The public authorities of state and
town began, early in the century, to make more frequent orders for
their repression, but it was soon clear that these orders could not be
effectual unless the relief of the poor were better organised.

[Sidenote: (1) Private individuals.]

For the most part charity was administered still either by private
individuals or ecclesiastical officials. We can form some idea of the
methods of private donors from Harman's description of Elizabeth,
Countess of Shrewsbury, to whom he dedicates his book. In his address
to her he says, he knows well her "tender, pytyfull, gentle and noble
nature; not onelye havinge a vygelant and mercifull eye to your poore,
indygente and feable parishnores; yea, not onely in the parishe where
your honour moste happely doth dwell, but also in others invyroninge
or nighe adioyning to the same; as also aboundantly powringe out
dayely your ardent and bountifull charytie upon all such as commeth
for reliefe unto your luckly gates." No wonder the writer thought it
was his "good necessary" and "bounden duty" to acquaint her with the
"abhominable wycked and detestable behavor" of some of those rogues who
"wyly wander, to the utter deludinge of the good gevers, decevinge and
impoverishinge of all such poore householders, both sicke and sore, as
neither can or maye walke abroad for reliefe and comfort, where, in
dede, most mercy is to be shewed[37]."

[37] Epistle to the _Caveat for Commen Cursetors_, pp. 19, 20.

Stow tells us, that he had himself seen two hundred people fed at
Cromwell's gate, twice every day, with bread, meat, and drink, "for
he observed that ancient and charitable custom, as all prelates,
noblemen or men of honour and worship, his predecessors had done
before him[38]." This open-handed hospitality thus seems to have been
the custom of the time, and if exercised, without discrimination and
supervision, would tend to foster the increase of idle beggars and do
little to lessen the hardships of the industrious poor.

[38] Stow's _Survey_, ed. Thoms, p. 34. Quoted in W. J. Ashley's
_Economic Hist._ II. p. 329.

[Sidenote: (2) Monasteries.]

The methods of distributing charity employed in the monasteries were
little better. It is true that the services rendered by the monks
and nuns to education were considerable, and that a number of old
people and children were maintained in some of the religious houses.
Lodging also was given to wayfarers, and thus a very useful function
was fulfilled in countries where there were few inns and no casual
wards. But much of the relief given to the poor by the monks seems to
have been distributed in a similar manner to that of the Countess of
Shrewsbury. Alms were given to the poor at the gates: many testators
had left money to be distributed in small doles at certain stated
periods. Moreover the relief given at different monasteries was not
coordinated in any way. The members of each institution gave their
alms in their own way without any reference to the gifts of their
neighbours. Besides, monks were not primarily intended to be relieving
officers, and were not placed where they would be most useful for that
purpose; there might be many in one neighbourhood and few or none
in another. The charity distributed by the monks therefore was to a
great extent unorganised and indiscriminate and did nearly as much to
increase beggars as to relieve them[39].

[39] The monks were also probably poorer at the beginning of the
sixteenth century than they had been in times past, and were so less
able to give relief. Father Gasquet quotes several cases in which the
revenues of the monasteries had been diminished by the demands made
upon them by those in power. He quotes a letter from the son of the
Duke of Buckingham, showing that in some cases they seem to have been
expected to provide free board and lodging for the poor relations of
wealthy families. "And because," the writer says, "he hath no dwelling
place meet for him to inhabit (he was) fain to live poorly at board in
an Abbey this four years day with his wife and seven children." _Henry
VIII. and the English Monasteries_, Gasquet, I. p. 34 n. See also p.
29. The revenues of the monastic bodies also largely consisted of
payments of fixed amounts, and would be unfavourably affected by the
rise in prices, which was especially great after the alteration of the
coinage in 1527.

[Sidenote: (3) Hospitals.]

But besides the monasteries there were hospitals. The term hospital
was by no means confined to institutions for relieving the sick, but
almshouses, orphanages and training homes were often called by this
name. St Thomas's Hospital may be taken as a typical institution of the
kind[40]. The date of its foundation is uncertain, but, early in the
thirteenth century, it was destroyed by fire, and in 1228 was rebuilt
on much the same site as that occupied by the St Thomas's Hospital of
our own time. In 1323 the brethren were ordered to follow the rule
of St Augustine, that is they were to take the vows of obedience
and chastity, and to renounce individual property. The hospital
consisted of Master, brethren, and sisters, and in the poet Gower's
time there were also nurses, for he left bequests to the Master,
brethren, sisters, and nurses, and asked from each their prayers. But,
although the rule of St Augustine and the prayers for the benefactors
belonged to the old order of things, the relief given to the poor was
essentially the same from the time of Henry III. to that of Queen
Victoria. It was founded for the relief and cure of poor people, and
in 1535 there were forty beds for the poor, and food and firing were
provided for them. Three years later it was surrendered into the hands
of Henry VIII., and under his successor was reconstituted mainly on the
old lines, but on a very much larger scale.

[40] W. Rendle, _St Thomas's Hospital_. The information in this paper
is derived from the Cartulary of S. Thomas, Stow MSS. 942.

There were however several drawbacks to the hospitals as institutions
for the relief of the poor. There was little security that the funds
were well administered or that the appointments were impartially made.
The king himself seems to have tried to exercise undue influence even
in the case of St Thomas's Hospital: in 1528 he pressed Wolsey to give
the Mastership to his chaplain, who, he said, was not learned enough
for the king. There were however worse abuses than this, and even as
early as the time of Henry V. it was necessary to pass a statute to
prevent the maladministration of hospital funds[41]. Moreover at best
the hospitals were only isolated centres of charity; they were not
numerous enough to deal with poverty as a whole, and they were not
connected with each other. The officials of each hospital acted on
their own responsibility and afforded much or little relief to the poor
of their immediate neighbourhood, but were almost as powerless as a
private individual to check the general evil.

[41] 2 Hen. V. Stat. I. c. 1. In the _Complaynt of Roderyck Mors_ the
writer asserts the existence of a similar evil: "I heare that the
masters of your hospytals be so fatt that the poore be kept leane and
bare inough," p. 52. Edition of E. E. T. S.

[Sidenote: 4. Attempts at Reorganisation.]

The charitable endowments of the Continent were as inefficient as
those of England, and both in England and abroad we find that attempts
were made to organise a public system of poor relief in order that
the honest poor might be relieved, and the bands of vagrants justly
punished and repressed. Prof. Ashley has sketched the early history
of poor relief on the Continent. He shows that, as early as 1522, the
German towns of Augsburg and Nuremburg endeavoured to regulate the
administration of charity in order to repress beggars, and that in
1525 the townsmen of Ypres reorganised their charitable institutions
on a general plan and subjected the whole to public management with
the approval of the ecclesiastical authorities. This organisation of
Ypres was submitted to the judgment of the Sorbonne and, with some
limitations, the principles involved were approved[42]. It is thus
clear that the necessity of reforming the administration of charity
was felt even in districts which were hostile to the Reformation, and
in countries where the Reformers were in power the old charitable
endowments were often seized by the public authorities, who by so doing
placed themselves under greater obligations to provide for the poor.

[42] Ashley, _Economic Hist._, vol. II. pp. 346, 347.

In England we find that the course of events is similar. The citizens
of London, before 1518, began to draw up orders with the object of
repressing vagrants and controlling charity, but after the dissolution
of the monasteries they found it necessary to refound and reorganise
the greater part of the existing system of relief. From that time until
the reign of Charles I. constant efforts were made to create and to
administer an efficient system of poor relief under public management.
In the reign of Charles I., and not until then, were the efforts
successful, and the English organisation is then seen to be almost[43]
the only successful survivor of the many schemes of the same kind which
had been tried in Western Europe.

[43] There was a successful system of poor relief in Holland.

[Sidenote: 5. (a) Three factors in the making of English poor relief.]

There were in England three principal factors in the development of
the system; first the orders of the municipal governors, secondly the
regulations of Parliament, and lastly the efforts made by the Privy
Council to induce the justices of the peace to put the law in execution.

[Sidenote: 5. (b) Three periods.]

These three factors help to create the English system of poor relief
from the reign of Henry VIII. to that of Charles I. But they are not of
the same relative importance throughout the whole period. Before 1569
the orders of the municipal governments are important, between 1569 and
1597 the history of legislation is more prominent, while after 1597 the
orders directed by the Privy Council to the justices become the most
powerful force in securing proper administration, and are therefore the
predominant factor in the development of the whole system.

We will consider each of these periods in turn and we shall find that,
while each contributed its share to the making of the English system
of poor relief, it was only during the last that the success of the
organisation was assured.




CHAPTER III.

1514-1569.

POOR RELIEF IN THE TOWNS.

  1. Importance of municipal government in Tudor towns.
  2. London Regulations for a constant supply of corn. 1391-1569.
  3. Regulations for the repression of vagrants and the relief of the
poor. 1514-1536.
  4. Refoundation of St Bartholomew's and imposition of a compulsory
poor rate. 1536-1547.
  5. Completion of the Four Royal Hospitals and establishment of a
municipal system of poor relief in London. 1547-1557.
  6. Failure of the municipal system in London.
  7. Provision of corn in Bristol and Canterbury.
  8. Lincoln. Survey of poor and arrangements for finding work for the
unemployed.
  9. Ipswich. Survey of poor, imposition of compulsory poor rate and
foundation of Christ's Hospital.
  10. Cambridge. Survey of poor and assessment of parishioners.
  11. Summary.


We have seen that the social changes of the beginning of the sixteenth
century led to a great increase in the number of vagrants; and that
men were then more ready to substitute secular for ecclesiastical
control in matters concerning the poor. Town Council, Privy Council
and Parliament all endeavour to organise and supervise new methods
of charity; and, by the combined efforts of all three, a new system
of poor relief was gradually created. The earlier efforts in this
direction were made between 1514 and 1569; and Town Councils were then
more active than Parliament or Privy Council.

[Sidenote: 1. Importance of municipal government in Tudor times.]

It is difficult now to realise the independent position of the town
governors of Tudor times, and the authority possessed by them of
regulating their own affairs. They imposed taxes without the authority
of Parliament; uncontrolled, they could expel new comers from their
borders; and they were fertile in the device of new punishments to
drive the sturdy vagabond to honest labour. Each town was a law unto
itself. Some municipal rulers made few experiments in this direction;
others built hospitals for the old, and training homes for the young;
invented punishments for the vagrants, and collected funds for the
relief and discipline of all who were unable to support themselves.
Many of the more successful orders, enforced in particular towns, were
afterwards embodied by Parliament in statutes applying to the whole
country. In the period from 1514 to 1569, the municipal regulations
concerning these matters suggest the provisions of the statutes, more
often than the provisions of the statutes suggest the regulations of
the towns. Between 1514 and 1569 we will therefore examine, first, the
action taken by the municipal authorities to improve and regulate the
condition of sturdy vagabonds, unemployed workmen, poor householders,
impotent beggars and neglected children: we will then consider the
efforts made by the Privy Council for the same ends and the laws passed
by Parliament with regard to the relief of the poor.

As London was, in these matters, more vigorous than other towns, we
will examine first in detail the orders adopted there, and we will then
see how far these regulations were typical of those enforced in other
places.

[Sidenote: London. 2. Regulations for a constant supply of corn in
London, 1391-1569.]

Some of the earliest of the London regulations for the help of the
poorer classes concern the supply of corn. Even as early as the reign
of Richard II., efforts had been made by particular Lord Mayors to
bring corn to the City in years of famine. Adam Bamme, Lord Mayor in
1391, "in a great dearth procured corn from parts beyond the seas to
be brought hither in such abundance as sufficed to serve the city and
the counties near adjoining; to the furtherance of which good work he
took out of the orphans' chest in the Guildhall two thousand marks to
buy the said corn, and each alderman laid out twenty pounds to the
like purpose[44]." But as London became more populous, the need of a
constant supply of grain became much more urgent. In September 1520,
therefore, an attempt was made to obtain the necessary funds in a more
regular manner.

[44] Stow's _Survey_, ed. Thoms, p. 41.

The Common Council then resolved that "Forasmoch as great derth and
scarcity of whete hath nowe lately been and more lyke tensue, yf good
and politique provision were not shortly made and hade Therfor in
avoydyng therof, god grauntyng, yt is nowe by auctorite of the Common
Counsell fully agreed and graunted that, in all goodly hast, oon
thousand pound of money shalbe levyed and payed by the felishippes
of sondry misteres and crafts of this citie, by way of a prest and
loone[45]." Each craft was to be assessed for an amount proportionate
to its wealth, and the wardens of each were left free to levy the sum
upon the craftsmen according to their discretion. The funds so obtained
were to be used to purchase corn for the City; this was to be placed in
a public granary and used as a public store.

[45] _Letter Book of the City of London_, N. fol. 142-3. Quoted in
Herbert, _Livery Companies_, I. p. 132. Herbert quotes from the
corresponding entry in the _Journals_, 25 September, 12 Hen. VIII.

If only a small quantity of grain was brought into London by the
ordinary corn dealers, the buyers would bid against one another until
the price of corn became very great. There were no rapid means of
communication and, for a time therefore, grain might be sold at famine
prices and then as suddenly fall in value. In future, whenever this
seemed likely to happen, a precept was to be issued by the Lord Mayor,
ordering a certain quantity of the public store to be brought into the
market. This supply would help to satisfy the more importunate buyers,
and so send down the price to something like the ordinary level.

The public store of the City of London did not however become a
permanent institution until after 1520; on one occasion the authorities
misjudged the market and much of the original loan was lost, after
which there was some difficulty in persuading the Companies to again
advance the necessary capital. However, from this time onwards, corn
was generally bought for the Companies' granaries whenever especial
scarcity was feared, and during the reign of Elizabeth the Companies'
store became a regular institution.

So far as the arrangements made in 1520 are concerned, the poor do not
appear to have obtained corn at a reduced price, but they were the
greatest sufferers when the price of corn was high, and regulations
which had the effect of lessening the price benefited them more than
the other inhabitants of London and were made chiefly in their interest.

[Sidenote: 3. Regulations adopted in London for the repression of
vagrants and relief of the impotent poor, 1514-1518.]

A series of regulations was adopted in London, between 1514 and 1524,
which more directly concerns vagrants and beggars. These regulations
are at first negative rather than positive; they forbid able-bodied
vagrants to beg and they forbid the citizens to give to unlicensed
beggars. Public disgrace formed part of the punishment of offending
vagrants. Vagabonds were to have the letter V. fastened upon their
breasts and were to be "dryven throughoute all Chepe with a basone
rynging afore them[46]." Four surveyors were appointed to carry
out these instructions. They were apparently dressed as grand City
officials, for the Chamberlain paid the Lord Mayor for their sock hosen
"embrodred[47]." Another special officer was admitted to the office
of "Master and cheff avoyder and Keeper owte of this Citie and the
liberties of the same of all the myghty vagabunds and beggars, and all
other suspecte persons, excepte all such as were uppon thym the badge
of this City[48]." In 1524, moreover, a great search was made, and it
was ordered, that the vagabonds "myghty of body" should be "tayed at a
cart's tayle" and "be beten by the Shireff's offycers with whippes in
dyuers places of the Citie." The Chamberlain, also, "shall cause rownde
colers of iron to be made for every of them, havyng the armes of this
Citie uppon them and the same colers to be putt aboute theyr nekks[49]."

[46] _Repertories_, III. f. 164, Sept. 9 Hen. VIII. The Repertories
of the City of London consist of large volumes in manuscript, dating
from 1485. They contain the minutes of the proceedings of the Court of
Aldermen and copies of the orders decided upon by that Court.

[47] _Ib._ III. f. 197.

[48] _Ib._ IV. f. 154 _b_

[49] _Repertories_, IV. f. 215. Oct. 13, 16 Hen. VIII.

Meanwhile other orders of the Court of Aldermen concern the impotent
and aged poor, and at first the City rulers did not become responsible
for the collection of funds, but only for distinguishing between the
really disabled beggars and impostors. Tokens of pure white tin were
provided, which the Aldermen were to give to the impotent poor: all
other beggars were strictly prohibited[50]. These efforts do not differ
in principle from those of former times, but the orders are more
frequent, and the appointment of surveyors and officers indicates that
they were better enforced.

[50] _Ib._ III. f. 174 _b_ and 192, 194. About five hundred tokens were
thus distributed, 18 Feb., 9 Hen. VIII.

[Sidenote: Collection of alms under authority of Aldermen of London.]

Very soon it was seen that this was not enough, because, even if the
disabled beggars were licensed, they were not always sufficiently
relieved. In 1533, therefore, the Aldermen were ordered to depute
persons to gather "the devotions of parishioners for the poor
folk weekly and to distribute them to the poor folk at the church
doors[51]." Thus the municipality began to make itself responsible for
the collection of funds but, at the same time, the system of licensed
beggars was continued, and more brooches were made for the Aldermen to
distribute to such impotent beggars as they allowed.

[51] _Repertories_, VIII. f. 274 _b_.

So far, therefore, the authorities of London had taken measures to
limit relief to the deserving poor, but they had not attempted much
organisation of funds, or attempted to forbid beggars altogether.

[Sidenote: 4. Refoundation of St Bartholomew's Hospital and imposition
of compulsory poor rates in London, 1536-1547.]

But the dissolution of the monasteries made the relief of the poor by
public authority a much more urgent matter. Stow gives a list of 15
hospitals and four lazar houses which existed within the City walls in
1536[52]. Eight of these were in danger, including some of the richest
and largest foundations. St Mary's Spittle provided 180 beds for the
poor, while St Thomas's and St Bartholomew's each maintained places for
40 patients. In 1538, therefore, the City authorities made an effort
to save these hospitals. The mayor, Sir Richard Gresham, the aldermen
and the commonalty of the City of London, presented a petition to
Henry VIII., and asked that these three foundations and the new Abbey
on Tower Hill might be preserved, "so that all impotent persones, not
hable to labor shalbe releved by reason of the sayd hospitalls & abbey,
and all sturdy beggers not wylling to lab^r shalbe punisshed, so that
w^t Godd's grace fewe or no persones shalbe seene abrode to begge or
aske almesse."

[52] Stow mentions 20 hospitals altogether. Two, Christ's and
Bridewell, were later foundations, and three other foundations had
already been suppressed by Hen. V. The purpose and fate of the
remaining fifteen, as stated by Stow, are given below. No. 3, 4, 5, 6,
9, 10, 11, 14 were the eight threatened by Hen. VIII., and also No. 13,
until rescued by the Mercers. Stow's _Survey of London_, pp. 183-184,
ed. Thoms, 1876.

         Hospital      |    Founded    |   Purpose    |  Suppressed  |    Refounded
  ---------------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+------------------
   1. St Mary's,       |               | For lunatics |     Yes      |     Given to
      Barking          |               |              |              |  St Catherine's
                       |               |              |              |
   2. St Anthony's,    |               | Free School  |   Edw. VI.   |       Gone
      Broad Street     |               |              |              |
                       |               |              |              |
   3. St Bartholomew's | Rahere, temp. | Sick people  |  Hen. VIII.  |  By Hen. VIII.
                       |    Hen. I.    |              |              |
                       |               |              |              |
   4. St Giles in      | Matilda, wife |    Lepers    |      "       |
      the Fields       |  of Hen. I.   |              |              |
                       |               |              |              |
   5. St John's of     |               | For defence  |      "       |
      Jerusalem        |               |  of Rhodes   |              |
                       |               |              |              |
   6. St James in      |  By citizens  |   Leprous    |      "       |
      the Fields       |               |   virgins    |              |
                       |               |              |              |
   7. St John's        |   Hen. VII.   |   100 poor   |   Edw. VI.   |     By Mary.
      at Savoy         |               |    people    |              | Barrack, Chas. I.
                       |               |              |              |
   8. St Catherine's   | Matilda, wife |   Master,    |     Not      |
      by the Tower     |  of Stephen,  |  Chaplain,   |  suppressed  |
                       |      and      | 3 brethren,  |              |
                       |  Catherine,   | 3 sisters,   |              |
                       |    wife of    |    and 10    |              |
                       |  Hen. VIII.   | alms-women;  |              |
                       |               |  also dole   |              |
                       |               |              |              |
   9. St Mary's        |               |  100 blind   |  Hen. VIII.  |
      within           |               |    people    |              |
      Cripplegate      |               |              |              |
                       |               |              |              |
  10. St Mary's,       |     Simon     |   Lunatics   |      "       |   Given by Hen.
      Bethlehem        |    Fitzmary   |              |              |   VIII. to the
                       |               |              |              |     citizens
                       |               |              |              |
  11. St Mary's        |     1203      | 180 beds for |  Hen. VIII.  |
      Spittle without  |               |     poor     |     £478     |
      Bishopsgate      |               |              |              |
                       |               |              |              |
  12. St Mary's,       |               | Brotherhood  | Hen. V. and  |  Refounded Edw.
      Rounceval        |               |              | Edw. VI. IV. |   to Edw. VI.
                       |               |              |              |
  13. St Thomas of     |               |  Master and  | Surrendered  | Sold to Mercers
      Acon             |               |   brethren   |  Hen. VIII.  |
                       |               |              |              |
  14. St Thomas in     |     Rich.     | Sick people  |  Hen. VIII.  | By citizens and
      Southwark        |  Whittington  |              |              |     Edw. VI.
                       |               |              |              |
  15. Hospital and     |               |  Almshouse   | Suppressed   | The poor remain
      almshouse,       |               | for 13 poor  |              | and are paid by
      Whittington      |               |   men and    |              |     Mercers
      Coll.            |               |   College    |              |
                       |               |              |              |
  16, 17, 18. Three    |               | all cells of |   Hen. V.    |
      hospitals        |               |   Clugny.    |              |


In the same petition they also ask that the king will give to the
mayor and commonalty the four great churches of the Grey, White,
Black and Augustinian Friars because they state that the remaining
churches "suffyce not to receyve all the people comyng to the sayd
parysshe churches" and the sick crowd in with the healthy to the "great
noysance" of the inhabitants[53]."

[53] _Memoranda of the Royal Hospitals of the City of London_, Appendix
I. pp. 1 and 2.

On the 23rd of June, 1544, the king, to some slight extent, acceded to
their requests and refounded St Bartholomew's Hospital. He agreed to
furnish an endowment of 500 marks a year if the Common Council would do
the same[54]. In 1546 the Common Council therefore bound themselves to
do so, and in December an indenture was drawn up between the City and
the king. The king granted not only St Bartholomew's but also Bethlehem
Hospital, besides the Church of the Grey Friars, which was henceforward
named Christ Church, and the parish church of St Nicholas. The City
agreed to provide 100 beds in St Bartholomew's, which for a time was
called the House of the Poor in Smithfield[55]. In 1547 the king
confirmed his grant by Letters Patent[56].

[54] _Ib._ II. p. 4.

[55] _Ib._ III. p. 8.

[56] _Ib._ IV. p. 8.

But the citizens were at this time very little disposed to give to
the poor. Latimer[57], Lever, and Brinklow all complain of their
want of generosity, and the reasons given for the imposition of the
first compulsory poor rate show that the complaints were well founded.
Collections were made in the London parish churches every Sunday,
but the sum raised was not sufficient to support the poor of even
one hospital. In 1547 (1 Edward VI.), therefore, the Common Council
resolved that the Sunday collections should cease and that instead "the
citizens and inhabitants of the said Citie shall further contrybute &
paye towards the sustentacon & maynteyning & fynding of the said poore
personages the moitie or half deale of one whole fiftene[58]." This
is probably the first time a compulsory tax was levied for the relief
of the poor; the assessment is ordered by the London Common Council
a quarter of a century before Parliament had given authority for the
making of assessments for this object.

[57] "Sermon of the Plough, preached by Latimer, at St Paul's, Jan.
1548/9." "Now what shall we say of these rich citizens of London? What
shall I say of them? Shall I call them proud men of London, malicious
men of London, merciless men of London? No, no, I may not say so;
they will be offended with me then. Yet must I speak. For is there
not reigning in London as much pride, as much covetousness, as much
cruelty, as much oppression and as much superstition as was in Nebo?
Yes, I think, and much more too.... But London was never so ill as it
is now. In times past men were full of pity and compassion, but now
there is no pity; for in London their brother shall die in the streets
for cold, he shall lie sick at the door between stock and stock ... and
perish there for hunger: was there ever more unmercifulness in Nebo? I
think not. In times past, when any rich man died in London they were
wont to help the poor scholars of the Universities with exhibition.
When any man died, they would bequeath great sums of money toward
the relief of the poor. When I was a scholar in Cambridge myself, I
heard very good report of London, and knew many that had relief of the
rich men of London: but now I can hear no such good report, and yet I
inquire of it, and hearken for it; but now charity is waxen cold, none
helpeth the scholar, nor yet the poor."

[58] Journals, XV. f. 325 _b_. See Appendix. The Journals of the City
of London, like the Repertories, are contained in large volumes, in
manuscript. They contain notes of the resolutions passed by the Common
Council, and both copies of precepts sent by the Mayor to the Aldermen,
and of letters written to official personages upon matters decided by
the Common Council.

The half-fifteenth was to support the poor in the hospital for a year;
after that time other methods of raising funds were employed. In 1548,
certain profits belonging to the City were assigned to the fund for the
relief of the poor, and, in addition, the sum of 500 marks, promised
by the Common Council, was assessed upon the different City Companies
according to their importance. The chief companies seemed to have paid
willingly, but some of the smaller companies objected, and the wardens
were ordered in consequence to appear before the Court of Aldermen and
bring their money[59]. On this occasion the companies yielded and the
money was paid, but the incident shows that, as yet, the citizens were
by no means eager to undertake the duty of looking after the poor.

[59] _Repertories_, XII., No. II. f. 52, f. 53 _b_.

The provision for them had been altogether inadequate. "I thinke in
my judgement," writes Brinklow in 1545, "under heaven is not so lytle
provision made for the pore as in London, of so ryche a Citie[60]."
The foundation of St Bartholomew's was not sufficient: in 1550, Lever,
preaching before the king, reiterates the complaints of Brinklow.
"Nowe speakynge in the behalfe of these vile beggars, ... I wyl tell
the(e) that art a noble man, a worshipful man, an honest welthye man,
especially if thou be Maire, Sherif, Alderman, baily, constable or any
such officer, it is to thy great shame afore the worlde, and to thy
utter damnation afore God, to se these begging as thei use to do in
the streates. For there is never a one of these, but he lacketh eyther
thy charitable almes to relieve his neede, orels thy due correction to
punysh his faute.... These sely sols have been neglected throghout al
England and especially in London and Westminster: But now I trust that
a good overseer, a godly Byshop I meane, wyl see that they in these two
cyties, shall have their neede releeved, and their faultes corrected,
to the good ensample of al other tounes and cities[61]."

[60] Brinklow, _The Lamentacyon of a Christen agaynst the Citye of
London for some certayn greate vyces used therin_, p. 91.

[61] Arber's reprints of Lever's _Sermons_, p. 78.

Brinklow and Lever both throw the responsibility for the disorder
upon the citizens and the municipal officers, as if they were then
recognised to be the chief authorities for dealing with the poor.

[Sidenote: 5. Completion of the Four Royal Hospitals and establishment
of a municipal system of poor relief in London.]

Ridley was the "good overseer," who was to amend these faults. In April
1550 he was appointed Bishop of London and, during the next three
years, he endeavoured to place the relief of the poor on a sound
basis. The Lord Mayors of 1551 and 1552, Sir Richard Dobbs and Sir
George Barnes, also took the matter up warmly and, in consequence, a
municipal system was organised and the three royal hospitals of King
Edward's foundation were established.

Negotiations were soon undertaken with regard to St Thomas's Hospital:
the citizens wished to obtain the lands of the hospital for the relief
of the poor. In February 1552 some of their number were appointed to
"travaile" with the king for this purpose, and it was finally agreed
that the citizens should pay £2461. 2_s._ 6_d._ for property worth
about £160 a year, while the king should grant an endowment in addition
of about an equal amount. Thus St Thomas's Hospital was refounded under
municipal management[62].

[62] Supplement to _Memoranda relating to the Royal Hospitals_, p. 7.

At the same time it was reported that St Bartholomew's Hospital had
fallen into decay; the buildings were therefore repaired and the
endowments increased. Christ's Hospital, the present Blue Coat School,
was also founded for fatherless children, on the land of the Grey
Friars formerly granted by Henry VIII. In order to raise the necessary
funds the inhabitants of London were called to their parish churches
and there were addressed in eloquent orations from the Lord Mayor, Sir
Richard Dobbs, and the Aldermen and other "grave citizens." They were
told how much better it would be to take the beggars from the streets
and provide for them in hospitals, and were asked how much they would
contribute weekly towards their relief. Books were drawn up of the
sums promised and delivered by the Mayor to the King's Commissioners,
in order that the king might do his part, and the whole be placed upon
a satisfactory basis[63]. At the same time Ridley had endeavoured to
help the citizens to obtain the royal palace of Bridewell, in order
that a new kind of hospital might be founded, not for the impotent,
but for the training, correction and relief of the able-bodied. He
tried to interest Cecil in his object, and his letter to him is a
curious specimen of the style of a charity letter of the time. "Good
Mr Cecil," he writes, "I must be a suitor unto you in our good Master
Christ's cause; I beseech you be good to him. The matter is, Sir,
alas! he hath lain too long abroad (as you do know) without lodging,
in the streets of London, both hungry, naked and cold. Now, thanks
be to Almighty God! the citizens are willing to refresh him, and to
give him both meat, drink, cloathing and firing: but alas! Sir, they
lack lodging for him. For in some one house, I dare say, they are fain
to lodge three families under one roof. Sir, there is a wide, large,
empty house of the King's Majesty's, called Bridewell, that would
wonderfully well serve to lodge Christ in, if he might find such good
friends in the court to procure in his cause.... Sir, I have promised
my brethren the citizens to move you, because I do take you for one
that feareth God, and would that Christ should lie no more abroad in
the streets[64]."

[63] Stow's _Survey_, edited Thoms, p. 140.

[64] Ridley's _Life of Bishop Ridley_, p. 377.

In a sermon preached by him before Edward in 1552 Ridley spoke much of
the duties and responsibilities of those in high places towards the
weaker classes. After the sermon we are told that the king sent for the
Bishop and asked him what were the measures that he wished undertaken
for the help of the London poor. Ridley asked leave to confer with
the Lord Mayor and citizens of London, and, by them in the same year,
a petition was presented to the Privy Council, showing the manner in
which they hoped to proceed.

This petition stated that amongst the poor of the City the citizens
espied three sorts; the "succourless poor child," the "sick and
impotent," and the "sturdy vagabond." Christ's Hospital was now ready
for the first, and some provision had been made for the second. With
regard to the third class, that of sturdy vagabonds or idle persons,
they considered "that the greatest number of beggars, fallen into
misery by lewd and evil service, by wars, by sickness or other adverse
fortune, have so utterly lost their credit, that though they would show
themselves willing to labour, yet are they so suspected and feared of
all men, that few or none dare or will receive them to work: wherefore
we saw that there could be no means to amend this miserable sort, but
by making some general provision of work, wherewith the willing poor
may be exercised; and whereby the froward, strong and sturdy vagabond
may be compelled to live profitably to the Commonwealth[65]." The poor
to whom the citizens here refer are beggars; the poor householders
who remained at home are not considered. Moreover in describing the
sturdy vagabonds the word beggars is used, thus showing that it was
the mendicant class of whom the citizens were thinking, and that they
so far had little conception of distinguishing between the beggars
and other poor. The citizens go on to say, that the classes of sturdy
beggars they have in their mind are "the child unapt to learning," "the
sore and sick when they be cured," and "such prisoners as are quit at
the sessions." The general provision of work was to be furnished by a
hospital, and it is carefully stated that the occupations there were
to be "profitable to all the King's Majesty's subjects and hurtful to
none." It is interesting to notice how it is proposed to get over the
difficulty of pauper-made goods so far as the merchants were concerned.
Certain citizens in the trade were to give out the raw material to the
unemployed in the hospital. When they were wrought up, they were to
receive back the finished goods and pay the hospital for their labour,
while the stock of raw material was to be renewed. The manufactured
goods would thus be put upon the market by the merchants with the
rest of their stock and not in competition with them. They propose to
exercise such trades as the making of caps and of feather-bed ticks and
the drawing of wire. The "weaker sort" were to be employed in carding,
knitting, and the dyeing of silk; the "fouler sort" in the making of
nails and iron work.

[65] T. Bowen, _Extracts from the Records and Court Books of
Bridewell_, p. 2. Appendix.

Apparently the king and the Privy Council were satisfied with the
plans of the City authorities, for an indenture was drawn up between
the king and the citizens which was afterwards confirmed by the Royal
Letters Patent[66]. Not only were the earlier grants concerning St
Thomas's and Christ's confirmed, but the palace of Bridewell also
was given to the City, in order that provision might be made for the
relief, employment and discipline of sturdy beggars. Bridewell was
not however immediately established but there is a report concerning
St Bartholomew's in 1552, and Christ's and St Thomas's in 1553,
which show that these three then were doing a considerable work. The
pamphlet concerning St Bartholomew's was drawn up because there had
been complaints concerning the expenditure and the partial failure
of the work there[67]. The authorities state that the place was in a
very dilapidated condition when it was received from the king, but
that now, in 1552, one hundred beds were fully maintained; during the
last five years on an average eight hundred persons had been healed,
while one hundred and seventy-two had died. The regular expenses
amounted to nearly eight hundred pounds a year and the regular income
contributed by City and king reached the sum of £666. 13_s._ 4_d._ The
extra expenditure and the deficit were contributed "by the charitie
of certeine merciful citizens." The "biddell" of the hospital was
especially charged to see that there was no abuse of its charity. If
any person, that had been there cured, should counterfeit any "griefe
or disease" or beg within the City, the beadle was to "committ him
to some cage." Thus in 1552 the work of St Bartholomew's had been
settled on a satisfactory basis. In 1553 reports were also drawn up
of Christ's Hospital and St Thomas's[68]. Christ's then contained two
hundred and eighty children[69], while another hundred were boarded
in the country. More extensive powers seem to have been exercised
at St Thomas's Hospital than at the other Royal hospitals, possibly
because all the other hospitals dealt more especially with the
poor in the City and it was therefore more convenient to separate
their functions. St Thomas's was situated apart in Southwark and its
governors exercised more general powers. Not only did the hospital
relieve two hundred and sixty "aged, sore and sick persons" but it also
pensioned five hundred other poor who lived in their homes: moreover
in 1562 "yt is Agred uppon that A place shalbe appoynted to ponysh
the sturdy and transegressors[70]." The annual expenses of Christ's
and St Thomas's in 1553 together amounted to £3240. 15_s._ 4_d._, and
of this sum £2914 was given by "free alms of the Citizens of London."
Considering the value of money in those days and the probable number of
the inhabitants, this was a very large amount. The liberality of the
citizens was not always however stimulated by such bishops as Bishop
Ridley, or such Lord Mayors as Sir Richard Dobbs, Sir Martin Bowes, and
Sir George Barnes. In the reign of Elizabeth St Thomas's was in debt
and the number maintained there had to be considerably reduced. Before
1557 Bridewell also was established and thus the number of the four
Royal hospitals was completed. The hospital of Bethlehem was included
in the original grant of Henry VIII. and probably had a continuous
existence. It was a comparatively small institution, in which fifty or
sixty lunatics were maintained, and in later times was always reckoned
with Bridewell, so that it also formed part of the system of Royal
hospitals under the management of the City although it was not counted
as a separate hospital. In 1557 orders were drawn up for the government
of the hospitals[71], and we can see that their erection had already
made it more possible to distinguish between the different classes in
need of relief. The City rulers do not now as in 1552 consider the
word "beggars" interchangeable with the word "poor" but explain that
"there is as great a difference between a poor man and a beggar, as is
between a true man and a thief." ... "The policy of the erection of
hospitals ..." they say "hath had good success and taken effect; for
there is no poor citizen at this day that beggeth his bread but by some
mean his poverty is provided for." The objects of the organisation are
also explained to include the yielding "alms to the poor and honest
householder[72]."

[66] _Memoranda of the Royal Hospitals_, Appendix, pp. 52 and 59.

[67] A copy of the original pamphlet is in the British Museum. Eight
hundred persons had been healed "in the meane season" during the past
five years. The list of expenses is interesting because of the light it
casts upon the cost of living in 1552. The diet of the hundred patients
is calculated at 2_d._ the day; each sister was allowed for her board
sixteen pence a week, while the matron obtained eighteen pence.

[68] "Account of Expenses incurred by the City in erecting and
maintaining St Thomas's Hospital." Harleian MSS. No. 604, p. 176,
printed in Supplement to _Memoranda of Royal Hospitals_, p. 32.

[69] The allowance paid for the children was tenpence a week.

[70] W. Rendle, _Old Southwark_, p. 138. The whipping-post or "Crosse"
soon required repair, and stocks also were provided. We hear frequently
of its being used. In 1567, John Martyn was sentenced to twenty-five
stripes for robbing gardens and misusing a poor "innocent;" while in
1570, "Jane Thornton, one of the Systers," was sentenced to receive
"xii strypes, well layd on." There are several cases also in which
the hospital governors find masters for patients when they have been
cured, or sometimes bind them apprentice. In one case they apprentice
a boy who had been cured of a sore leg, and covenant that "yf hitt
happen the sayd Legg Do brek outt agayn" the boy shall be cured "only
of the chardg of the hospital." Occasionally there are details of the
employment of the inmates. In 1569 a small sum is received from the
Matron "for work done by the poore women and children," and in 1573 "a
mocion is made that a handemyll to grind corne may be provyded to sett
the pore to worke to kepe them from ydelnes." But the arrangements for
employment are on a very small scale and seem only likely to concern
patients, or perhaps the people in the casual ward. Others would be
sent to Bridewell. These details are all derived from Mr Rendle's _Old
Southwark_, where much more information, derived from old records of
the hospital, has been printed.

[71] The general rules relating to the holding of general Courts and to
the election of governors, the duties of the officers and the charges
to be given to both officers and governors were printed in 1557,
together with the particular regulations for the governors of Christ's.
An original copy is in the British Museum, entitled, "The Order of the
Hospitalls of K. Henry the viii^{th} and K. Edward the vi^{th},

       { S. Bartholomew's,
       { Christ's,
  viz. {
       { Bridewell,
       { S. Thomas,

By the Maior, Cominaltie and Citizens of London, Governors of the
Possessions, Revenues and Goods of the sayd Hospitals. 1557." The
orders provide that sixty-six governors should be appointed, fourteen
of whom were to be aldermen and the rest "grave commoners." Of the
fourteen aldermen, six were to be "Graye clokes" and two of these were
to be Governors general of all the hospitals.

[72] T. Bowen, _Extracts from the Records and Court Books of
Bridewell_, Appendix, II. p. 8 _seq._

The hospitals are said to be linked together in their government, the
objects of all are said to be the same; although to each hospital
some governors were especially appointed, all had authority and
responsibility with regard to the whole four[73].

[73] _Ib._, p. 9.

The London Bridewell was destined to be the forerunner of so many
Bridewells or Houses of Correction that it is perhaps interesting
to examine more closely the rules for its management. Any two of its
governors had power to take into the house persons presented to them
as "lewd and idle." They had also power to search all places in which
masterless men were likely to be found, and to punish landlords or
tenants who harboured them.

The governors of the whole establishment were subdivided so that
some might overlook every department. The rules with regard to the
cloth-making establishment will illustrate the kind of supervision
they were to exercise. They were first to make an inventory of the
raw material and of the looms and other necessary implements. They
were then to see that the clothier knew his business, and to order him
to return a monthly account of the number of cloths which had been
wrought. They were, moreover, to overlook the wool house, yarn house
and spinning house and "to comptroll and rebuke" as they "shall see
cause." They were to pay the workpeople, the weavers for weaving, the
fullers for thicking and the spinners for spinning. The steward was to
be allowed to charge for the diet of those that were employed. Every
week they were to make a summary of their doings and every month a
summary of their accounts.

Other crafts were supervised in the same manner; the nail house was in
close connection with the Company of Ironmongers, probably in order to
carry out the undertaking that the occupations "should be profitable
to all the King's subjects and hurtful to none." The Ironmongers were
to give "to this house, as the people of the same may reasonably
live"; they were to have the preference with regard to the sale of the
manufactured goods and to be allowed a month in which to make payment.

The worst vagrants were apparently sent to the mill and the bakehouse,
but men who were fit for better employment were not to stay there. If
the governors, we are told, shall "find any there above the ordinary,
then shall ye cause the same to be known to the clerk of the work and
see he bestow them in some other exercise."

Bridewell does not seem to have effectually reformed the vagrants,
for the governors were to "see to the good order of the said mills,
that neither the vagabonds do use shameless craving nor begging to the
great grief of good men and slander of the house, neither that they
obstinately and frowardly shall deny their aid and help towards the
lifting up and taking down of such grain as shall be brought into the
said mill[74]."

[74] T. Bowen. _Extracts from the Records and Court Books of
Bridewell_, Appendix, II., p. 11 _seq._ The whole of the particular
regulations relating to Bridewell are here printed.

Bridewell, we have seen, was founded for the unemployed, but it is
obvious from the language used that the citizens had mainly in their
minds beggars who were unemployed, and from the first it seems rather
to have been used for confirmed vagrants and untrained children than
for labourers out of work. The governors certainly held regular
meetings, about once a fortnight, and discussed the various cases
that came before them. These nearly all concern petty offenders,
thieves or vagrants, but there are one or two cases in which a man is
admitted because "the City is charged to find him[75]." Other entries
relate to young people who were apprenticed to the House and properly
trained to work at some trade. In the later years of the century
about two thousand persons passed through the hospital annually.
Bridewell was the last of the Royal Hospitals to be established after
1557. Some provision was made for every class of the London poor. The
municipal system of relief had begun with the punishment of vagrants;
it proceeded to license all beggars entitled to ask for relief, and
finally all the poor were nominally provided for and the funds were
raised by compulsory taxation.

[75] Some of the original Court Books of Bridewell are still preserved
among the records of its modern representative, King Edward's schools.
By the kindness of the authorities I have been allowed to examine them.

There was no sudden break with the older system. St Thomas's, St
Bartholomew's and Bedlam had all been hospitals for centuries. They had
been saved from destruction, improved and enlarged, but essentially the
same work was done in the same places. There were however important
points of difference between the new system and the old even as regards
these three hospitals. They were under public management. There were
many abuses in this management, but these abuses were now more readily
detected and punished and were found out and reformed several times in
the course of the next century.

But a more important difference lay in the fact that the hospitals were
not now isolated institutions, each dealing with their patients, but
were now part of a larger whole and had a definite part to play in the
government of the City. Vagrants, who were taken to Bridewell and found
to be ill, were sent on to St Bartholomew's or St Thomas's, while, on
the other hand, a whipping was administered to the idlers after cure
at St Thomas's, and the beadle of St Bartholomew's had special orders
to prevent discharged inmates from begging. All these regulations show
that they had become, not merely agencies for the relief of the sick,
but also part of a system which aimed at the repression of beggars.

Bridewell was the greatest innovation and the most characteristic
institution of the new system. The organisation for the relief of the
poor had been called into existence because the crowds of vagrants were
a chronic nuisance and danger to society. Bridewell dealt with the most
difficult class of these vagrants and gave some of them a chance of
training and reform. Moreover, Bridewell as a place of punishment for
idlers was the necessary counterpart of the new schemes for universal
relief. You could not relieve and find work for every one unless you
had some means for coercing and punishing the "sturdy vagabond."
Christ's Hospital, like Bridewell, is a new institution, but, unlike
Bridewell, it does not altogether strike out a new line. Still, as soon
as the relief of the poor becomes a public duty, institutions for the
training of the young become increasingly popular, and we shall find
that, during the next century, there are other Christ's Hospitals as
well as other Bridewells in most of the great towns of the kingdom.

[Sidenote: 6. Failure of the municipal system in London.]

This municipal system however was not successful in London. So far
as London was concerned the organisation seemed fairly complete. But
even from the local point of view the system was weak in one point.
Funds had to be provided. It was not easy suddenly to raise the money
necessary for the new organisation; men were not accustomed to be taxed
for the poor, and, as soon as the first enthusiasm had subsided, a
sufficient sum could not be collected. During the succeeding period we
shall find that the rulers of London found great difficulty in this
matter, and that this was one of the causes of the want of success of
the municipal system of London. But another difficulty was inherent in
the system in the very fact that it was municipal, and not national. A
few years ago the distribution of the Mansion House Relief Fund caused
a considerable immigration from the country. Exactly the same result
arose from the first organisation of the poor in the City of London.
In March, 1568/9, we are told that "forasmuch as experience late hath
shewed that the charitable relief gyuen as well by the quenes ma^{ties}
most noble progenitors as also the charitable almes from tyme to tyme
collected within this citie and bestowed by the cittizens, aswell upon
the poore and nedy citizens, being sicke, impotent and lambe as the
poore orphans and fatherless children ... aswell in Chryste Church and
Bridwell as in other hospitalles founded for the reliefe of the poore
within the said citie, hath drawen into this citie great nombers of
vagabondes, roges, masterless men and Idle persons as also poore, lame
and sick persons dwellyng in the most partes of the realme[76]." The
very measures which were taken to cope with poverty in London thus
increased the crowd of beggars, not because they caused more people to
become beggars, but because they attracted the poor from all parts. The
City organisation broke down because it was confined to the City, but
it had already done considerable service in helping the growth of the
national organisation which was to follow.

[76] _Journals_, XIX. 164 _b_. March 15, 1568/9.

[Sidenote: Poor relief in towns other than London.]

[Sidenote: 7. Provision of corn in Bristol and Canterbury.]

We have now to examine a few cases in which other towns before 1569
adopted measures similar to those of London. With regard to the
provision of corn it is quite possible that the London plan was widely
followed. In 1522 we read that in Bristol "this yere whete, corn,
and other graynes rose at a dire price, by reason whereof the said
Maire, of his gode disposition, inclyning his charitie towardes the
comen wele and profite of this Towne," ordered grain to be bought in
Worcester, "by reason wherof greate abundance of whete, corn, and other
graynes was so provided, that the inhabitauntes of the said towne were
greatly releved and comforted in mynysshing of the price of whete, corn
and other graynys, sold in the open markett of this said Towne[77]."
At Canterbury the funds for this purpose are accounted for in the year
1552. More than £70 was then spent in the purchase of wheat and barley.
It was not however altogether raised by the Town Council, more than
half was obtained from the sale of the plate of the parish of St Andrew
and from contributions from the parishes of St George and St Michael.
This corn was bought especially for the benefit of the poor, and about
one-fifth part of it was directly sold to them; the rest was sold to
large buyers, and could only have benefited the poor by easing the
market and so lowering the price to everybody[78].

[77] Ricart's _Calendar_, p. 49. Corn was also bought for the use of
the Mayor and "cominaltie" of Bristol, in 1532, p. 52.

[78] _Minutes collected from the ancient records of Canterbury._ Civis
(William Welfitt), No. XIV. Account of the corn furnished for the poor,
21st November, 1552 (6 Edw. VI.).

  £32 6_s._ contributed by St Andrew's, the value of the plate of
  the parish church.

  £32 contributed by the Mayor and Commonalty.

  £10 from the churchwardens of St George's.

   £2     "         "      "    St Michael's.

Sixty-six quarters and one bushel of wheat were bought, nearly fifteen
quarters of which were sold to the poor at sixteen shillings a quarter;
nearly forty quarters of barley were bought, and nine of these were
sold to the poor at six shillings a quarter.

[Sidenote: 8. Survey and employment of poor at Lincoln.]

The surveying and licensing of beggars appears to have been very usual.
Thus, at Lincoln in 1543, the constables were ordered to bring all the
poor people in the city before the justices and it was provided that
those who were to be allowed to beg should have a sign given to them. A
similar order was made in 1546, and it was also decided that no one was
to give alms to any beggar without a sign[79]. These orders are exactly
parallel to the earlier measures of the rulers of London. Next year, in
1547, the citizens of Lincoln took a farther step. Not only were the
beggars to be surveyed, but they were to be set to work, and in 1551
all the young people, who lived idly, were placed with the clothiers
for eight or nine years and were to have meat, drink and other
necessaries. All who refused this work were to be expelled from the
town[80]. In 1560 a salary is paid to an officer who is to oversee and
order all the poor and idle people in the town[81]. Special collections
for the relief of the poor were also made in Lincoln before 1569, but
apparently only in times of plague[82]. Grants were occasionally made
to particular poor at other times and there was a more than usually
definite amount of relief provided by the guild regulations for the
poorer members of some of the Lincoln guilds[83].

[79] _Hist. Man. Com._, Rep. XIV., App. VIII. pp. 38 and 40.

[80] _Hist. Man. Com._ _l.c._, pp. 41, 44.

[81] _Ib._, p. 51.

[82] _Ib._, p. 49. 5th May, 1557.

[83] In the Smiths' charter, approved 17th July, 1563, it is provided
that "if any fall into poverty, or by reason of infirmity or age shall
not be able to relieve himself, sevenpence shall be paid to him weekly
from the chattels of the fellowship, and on his death the officers
shall cause his body to be decently buried, and at his burial shall
dispose to the poor of the city two dozen of bread."

Also the Charter of the Girdlers, Glovers, Skinners, Pinners, Pointers,
Scriveners and Parchment-makers provides: "The weekly allowance to
brethren in poverty is 6_d._ at the least." Do. p. 57.

[Sidenote: 9. Ipswich. Survey of poor, imposition of compulsory poor
rate and foundation of Christ's Hospital.]

But the measures of Ipswich resemble those of London more closely
even than those of Lincoln. There the poor were not only surveyed
and licensed, but before 1569 compulsory taxation was adopted and a
municipal hospital was erected. As early as 1469 the burgesses had
granted certain dues to lepers, but it was not until about 1551 that
the municipal rulers began to make frequent and regular orders for
the regulation of relief and beggary. In that year two persons were
nominated by the bailiffs, "to enquire into the poore of every parish,
and thereof to make certifficate to the Bayliffs[84]." Next year we
find the burgesses anxious to increase the voluntary alms. The order
of the guild festival was arranged, and it was agreed that the town
officers should attend in their robes, and "they and all the Burgesses
shall offer, and the offerings shall goe to the poore[85]."

[84] Nathaniell Bacon's _Annalls of Ipswiche_, pp. 129, 235.

[85] Nathaniell Bacon's _Annalls of Ipswiche_, p. 237. There are thus
indications at Ipswich, as at Southampton, of a connection between the
guild customs and the action of the town with regard to the poor.

In 1556 eight burgesses were appointed to frame measures "for the
ordering of the maintenance of the poore and impotent people, ffor
providing them work, ffor suppressing of vagrants and idle persons[86]."

[86] _Ib._, p. 246. Oct. 9, 1556.

We also find an attempt to decrease the number of beggars in an order
worthy of an Irish town: "Noe children of this towne shall be p'mitted
to begg, and suche as shall be admitted thereto shall have badges[87]."

[87] _Ib._, p. 247.

A further step was then taken, and in Ipswich, as in London, compulsory
payments were made for the poor. In 1557 it is ordered that "if any
inhabitant shall refuse to pay suche money as shall be allotted him to
pay for the use of the poore," he shall be punished at the discretion
of the bailiffs[88].

[88] _Ib._, p. 250.

Moreover, in 1569, we find the town hospital established. Christ's
Hospital in Ipswich was built on the site of the House of the Black
Friars and was a house of correction, as well as an asylum for the old
and a training school for the young[89]. It was apparently no disgrace
for the old to be admitted, for when it was provided that ships should
pay certain dues to the hospital, it was also agreed that every
mariner, who had lived in the town three years and should stand in need
of assistance, should be allowed to go there[90]. At Ipswich therefore,
in 1569, beggars were badged, the poor were organised, compulsory
payments were exacted and a town hospital had been founded.

[89] _Ib._, p. 283.

[90] _Ib._, p. 292. 10 Sept. 1571.

[Sidenote: 10. Survey of poor and regular assessment of parishioners in
Cambridge.]

At Cambridge also similar measures were taken. Some of the profits
arising from Stourbridge fair had been left to the poor of Cambridge
and was connected with a provision for the maintenance of "obiits." The
funds belonging to the poor were preserved to them by the statute of
chantries, but before 1552 it had not been paid. Complaint was then
made, and it was decreed that the sum should be paid to the mayor,
bailiffs, and burgesses, and should be distributed by them as in
ancient times: this order was confirmed by royal grant in 1557[91]."

[91] Cooper's _Annals of Cambridge_, vol. II. pp. 62, 132.

It is possible that the passing of this money through their hands
may have made the town authorities regard the care of the poor as
especially their duty.

In any case, in 1556, there was great scarcity and, on Dec. 7th, "Dr
Perne, Vice-chancellor, Doctors Segewycke, Harvy, Walker and Blythe
met the Mayor, Bailiffs and two Aldermen in St Mary's Church[92]."
They called before them the churchwardens of all the parisshes, and
these "browght in the bylls what any parryshoner was cessed towardes
the relyeffe of the poore." Two days later the churchwardens presented
"bylles of the number of poore people in the parisshes," and they
were told to make a report as to "three states of the poore sort"
and to inquire who had come into the parish within three years.
Later, four superintendents and four "watchers for straunge beggeres"
were appointed, and collectors were chosen for the next Sunday. The
Vice-chancellor moved the Heads of Houses to make provision for the
poor, and the superintendents went about the different parishes and
visited the poor and settled what each should receive. On December 24th
the Mayor and Vice-chancellor met at St Mary's to again settle what
each poor person should be given and to give greater sums to some of
them than had been before appointed[93].

[92] _Ib._, p. 110.

[93] _Ib._, p. 110.

In 1560 a set of ordinances was made for the purpose of raising funds
to pay these pensions. Dues were to be paid for admission into the
liberties of the town, for beginning actions in the Cambridge Law
Courts, for the admission of attorneys to plead, for the surrendering
of every booth and the signing of every lease. All these were to
augment the funds for the poor. The attorneys were also to pay 1_d._
for every fee[94].

[94] _Ib._, p. 163.

Thus in Cambridge also we have, first, the surveying and numbering
of the poor; then, regular contributions from the parishioners, and
regular payments to the poor who could not support themselves. At
Cambridge there was no town hospital before 1569, and it was not until
1578 that a proposal to establish one there was made.

But attempts were already being made to found municipal hospitals in
Norwich and Gloucester, and these we shall examine when we consider
the events of the period between 1569 and 1597. Moreover, three of
the old hospitals of York were refounded and placed under municipal
management[95]. There the poor could be "set on worke" and the income
derived from them was to be "ymployed to the maintenance of the powre."
At Leicester also a municipal system for the poor had developed, and
it seems that, in 1568, two collections were levied for this purpose,
one of which provided the funds necessary for the relief distributed
under the authority of the statutes, and the other met the expenditure
incurred under the municipal regulations[96].

[95] "City of York in the Sixteenth Century." Article by Miss Maud
Sellars, _The Eng. Hist. Rev._, April 1894.

At York, in the reign of Henry VIII., beggars had been badged, and in
1551 a fixed poor rate had been levied from the different wards. The
system of allowing licensed beggars to beg was however continued in
York for some time after 1569.

[96] _Hist. Man. Com._, Rep. VIII. p. 427. Gloucester, 14 Eliz. c. 5.

Thus in Lincoln, Ipswich, Cambridge, and York the order of development
in matters concerning beggars and the unemployed is similar to that
of London. Beggars are surveyed; the truly helpless are licensed; the
others are forbidden to ask for any relief. Compulsory rates for their
relief were levied in Ipswich and probably in Cambridge. At the same
time provision is made for finding the able-bodied work in Lincoln, and
hospitals are built or refounded for them in Ipswich, in York, and in
Gloucester.

In Ipswich as in London all this was done before 1569, but other
towns were much more backward, and in some the beggars were still
unrestrained. There was thus no national system of poor relief, but
only isolated municipal attempts to deal with the matter, all following
the same general lines and becoming the rule, and not the exception,
as time went on. It will be more convenient to consider the advantages
of this system when we have also examined the doings of Parliament
and Privy Council, and can consider the organisation before 1569 as
a whole. The municipal system alone was not successful, in London or
elsewhere; it was increasingly difficult to deal with new-comers and to
provide funds.

But already before 1569 there were the beginnings of the succeeding
national system in the doings of Parliament and Privy Council.




CHAPTER IV.

THE PRIVY COUNCIL AND PARLIAMENT.

1514-1569.

  1. Efforts made by the Government to secure the employment of the
clothmakers during the crisis in the cloth trade of 1527-8.
  2. Regulations for the supply of the markets with corn, 1527-8.
  3. Similar action in regard to corn in 1548 and 1563.
  4. Letters of the Privy Council to particular local officials in
connection with the relief of the poor.
  5. Legislation concerning the relief of the poor during the reign of
Henry VIII.
  6. The two earlier statutes of Edward VI.
  7. Legislation between 1551 and 1569.
  8. Summary.


[Sidenote: 1. Efforts made by the Government to secure the employment
of the clothworkers during the crisis in the cloth trade of 1527-8.]

The Privy Council interfered comparatively little on behalf of the
poor in this earliest period of the development of the English system
of poor relief. However, in 1528 and on several other occasions the
Government issued orders similar to those afterwards issued by the
authority of the Privy Council. In 1528, however, these orders are said
to come from Wolsey or the king, and it only incidentally appears that
the Council had also a part in the matter. Possibly the policy, thus
initiated, was the creation of Wolsey or of the Duke of Norfolk, but
it was precisely the same kind of policy as that afterwards carried
out under the authority of the Privy Council during the reigns of
Elizabeth, James, and Charles.

The latter part of the year 1527 and the spring of 1528 was a time
of great discontent and disorder. At the beginning of the year 1528
England had allied herself with France against the Emperor, and thus
the ordinary trade in cloth to the Flemish markets was interrupted,
and the Staple was moved to Calais. The English cloth-making industry
was already carried on for foreign markets on a fairly large scale. In
certain districts the greater number of inhabitants were employed by
clothiers, who sold the manufactured cloths to the merchants chiefly
for Flemish markets. The declaration of war therefore prevented the
usual sale of cloths; consequently when the manufacturers in accordance
with the trade regulations then in force brought the cloths to
Blackwell Hall, the merchants did not buy as usual and the clothiers
ceased to find work for their men. The workers had few other resources
and disturbances followed. The Duke of Norfolk was sent into Suffolk
to restore order, and persuaded the clothiers to keep their men in
employment. He called representative employers before him from every
town and told them that the reports concerning the detention of English
merchants in Flanders were untrue. "If I had not quenched that bruit,"
he writes to Wolsey, "I should have had two or three hundred women
sueing to me to make the clothiers set their husbands and children
to work[97]." The same course was followed in other districts; Lord
Sandys writes to Wolsey that he has received letters from both Wolsey
and the King, which order him to see that the workpeople are not
dismissed. He says nothing of the kind shall occur in Hants., and he
hopes that Berks. and Wilts. will be equally well managed[98]. In Kent
Sir Henry Guildford obtained a promise that no men should be sent away
before harvest[99]. Both Norfolk and Guildford state however that the
clothiers cannot hold out much longer, and they ask Wolsey to remedy
this by persuading the merchants to buy the unsold cloths in the
clothiers' hands[100]. When the king's Council heard of the difficulty,
we are told that the Cardinal sent for a great number of merchants,
and thus addressed them. "Sirs, the King is informed that you use
not yourselves like merchants, but like graziers and artificers; for
when the clothiers do daily bring cloths to your market for your ease,
to their great cost, and there be ready to sell them, you of your
wilfulness will not buy them, as you have been accustomed to do. What
manner of men be you?" said the Cardinal, "I tell you, that the King
straitly commandeth you to buy their cloths, as before time you have
been accustomed to do, upon pain of his high displeasure[101]." The
Cardinal further threatened to throw open the cloth trade to foreigners
if the English merchants refused to buy as usual.

[97] J. S. Brewer's _Reign of Hen. VIII._, II. p. 261.

[98] _Letters and Papers of Hen. VIII._, 13 March, 1528, IV. No. 4058.

[99] Do. No. 4276; 17 May, 1528.

[100] Do. No. 4239; 4 May, 1528.

[101] Hall, p. 745, quoted in _Reign of Hen. VIII._, Brewer, II. p. 261.

This remedy might be a clumsy one but it was not ineffectual. The
cloth trade, in this instance, was restored to its usual course by
the conclusion of a truce between England and the Netherlands. The
time during which the contraction of the market occurred was short,
and the clothiers could and did lessen the evils of this temporary
fluctuation in their trade by continuing to find work and purchase
cloths, as in more prosperous times, even though it was to their
private disadvantage. A course of this kind was dangerous if the trade
was permanently affected, but possible and useful under the actual
circumstances, and probably saved the country from serious disturbance.
The incident illustrates the fact that the difficulty of the relief of
the poor was increased by the growth of manufactures on a large scale,
because employment was more unstable, and because all the members of a
family and most of the inhabitants of a neighbourhood were often out of
work at the same time. Under these circumstances the distress of the
poor was immediately followed by riots[102], and the action of Wolsey
and the Council was occasioned, not only by the sufferings of the poor,
but also by danger to the public peace.

[102] _Letters and Papers of Hen. VIII._, Nos. 4043, 4058.

[Sidenote: 2. Regulations for the supply of the markets with corn,
1527-8.]

The connection between the distress of the poor and public order is
also evident in the corn measures of 1527-8. The harvest of 1527
failed, while in the same year the coinage was debased, so that the
average price of wheat was nearly double that of preceding years[103].
Part of this rise was thought to be due to the unfair buying of some
of the corn-dealers. A commission was issued setting forth that owing
to forestalling, regrating and engrossing "more scarcity of corn is
pretended to be within this our said realm than, God be thanked, there
is in very truth[104]." The commissioners were therefore to punish all
offenders in this respect, and were also to find out by inquiry how
great the supply of corn really was and to see that it was brought to
market when needed[105]. Some of the reports drawn up in accordance
with these instructions are in existence, and give for particular
places the price and quantity of different kinds of grain and the
number of inhabitants in the district[106]. In Essex and Suffolk the
commissioners also talked to the more wealthy people and urged them to
buy a store of corn for the poor. It was only however in Colchester and
Bergholt that they seemed at all willing to do so[107]. On the whole
there were few efforts at direct relief of the poor; the object of the
Council was to obtain information and to prevent any aggravation of the
scarcity by unfair practices.

[103] The average prices of wheat were as follows:--

  1520.       1521.       1522.       1523.       1524.       1525.
  _s._ _d._   _s._ _d._   _s._ _d._   _s._ _d._   _s._ _d._   _s._ _d._
   9    4½     7    8½     6    0¼     5    6      5    1½     5    5

  1526.       1527.       1528.       1529.
  _s._ _d._   _s._ _d._   _s._ _d._   _s._ _d._
   6    2½    12   11      8   10¼     8   10

  Thorold Rogers, _Hist. of Agric. and Prices_.

[104] The buying and selling of bread were under regulation, while law
and custom required that the corn should be sold in the open market.
As a rule it was supposed to be sold by the producer to the consumer,
but certain licensed "dealers" or "badgers" were allowed to buy corn to
sell again. A "forestaller" was one who bought corn or victuals while
it was on the way to a port or market, and so did not give other buyers
an equal chance; an "engrosser" was a dealer who bought up corn while
it was growing, or purchased corn or victuals to sell again; and a
"regrator" was one who bought corn or victuals and sold it again in the
same market, or within four miles. 5 and 6 Edw. VI., c. 14.

[105] _Letters and Papers of Hen. VIII._, IV., No. 3587. 18 Nov. 1527.

[106] Thus one of the Wiltshire reports gives details of this kind
parish by parish for the hundred of Amysbury. Parish of Boscum, three
persons have grain; population of parish, 80. In Alyngton two persons
have grain; population 70.... In the parish of Fiddelldene seven
households, consisting of 114 persons, have grain, while sixty persons
were without. _Letters and Papers of Hen. VIII._, No. 3665. 15 Dec.
1527. See vol. IV., App. 273.

[107] _Letters and Papers of Hen. VIII._, vol. IV., No. 3625. Norfolk
to Wolsey.

At the same time measures were undertaken to lessen the disorder
from which the country was suffering. In December 1527 a great search
was made for vagrants, and the commissioners report the punishment of
valiant beggars[108]. Notwithstanding all this there was a serious
disturbance in Kent. The people asked for the return of the loan raised
two years before, because they were so sore impoverished by the great
dearth of corn[109]. The harvest of 1528 however was fortunately fairly
plentiful, and the country again became peaceful. These difficulties
again illustrate the connection between poverty and disorder, and show
that the Privy Council first came to interfere in these matters in
order to maintain the peace.

[108] _Letters and Papers of Hen. VIII._, vol. IV., Nos. 3822, 3664.

[109] Do. Nos. 4173 and 4192.

[Sidenote: 3. Similar action with regard to corn in 1548 and 1563.]

In 1549 and 1550 the price of provisions was again high, and the people
were mutinous. A proclamation was therefore issued fixing the price
of corn, butter, poultry, and other provisions. Letters were written
to the justices and to the Lords-Lieutenant, and a commission was
appointed to enforce its execution[110]. But the whole series of orders
was disobeyed and the misery caused by this year of scarcity partially
accounts for the rebellions, which ended in the fall of Somerset,
and nearly upset the Government altogether. Other instructions were
sent out in 1561[111]: the difficulty was a frequently recurring
one. The years of high-priced corn were years of riot, and resulted
in constantly increasing efforts of the Privy Council on behalf of
the poor. We shall see that in future years of scarcity the same
difficulties arise, and similar measures are taken. But, as more
experience was gained, there was less attempt to regulate prices, and
more to directly organise the relief of the poor, so that the efforts
to improve the administration of the poor law were closely connected
with the measures to provide corn for the poor in years of scarcity.

[110] _Dom. State Papers_, Edw. VI., vol. X. 42, 43, vol. XI. 5 and 6.

[111] Stowe MSS. 152, f. 16.

[Sidenote: 4. Letters of the Privy Council to particular local
officials in connection with the relief of the poor.]

These orders of 1528 and 1549 were general in their character, and
referred, either to large districts, or to the whole country. But
the Privy Council also began to interfere with the relief of the
poor by urging particular local officials to do their duty. This kind
of action is illustrated by the letters addressed to the rulers of
Kingston-upon-Hull in 1542 and of London in 1569.

In 1542 letters were sent by order of the Council to
Kingston-upon-Hull, requiring the mayor to fix the price of provisions,
"as the worckmen sent thither by the King's Ma^{tie} might live upon
theyre wages[112]." Other letters were sent to the rulers of London
in March[113] and June 1569 ordering them to be diligent in enforcing
the laws against vagrants, and the letter of June 1569 also directly
concerns the relief of the impotent poor.

[112] _Acts of the Privy Council_, Nicolas, vol. VII. p. 320.

[113] This letter is referred to in the June letter. _Journals_, XIX.
f. 171 _b_.

"It will be necessarye," runs the letter, "to provide charitablie for
suche as shalbe indede founde unfaynedlie impotent by age, syckness
or otherwise to get theire livinge by laboure and for those wee
earnestlie, and in the name of God, as wee ar all commanded, requyre
and chardge youe all and evry of youe to consider diligentlie howe
suche of theme as dwell within youre jurisdicion may be releyved
in every parishe, by the good order that is devysed by a late acte
of parliament and that thei be not suffred to wander or be abroad
as commonley thei doe in the streites and highe waies for lack of
sustentacon. And for the due and charitable execucon of that statute,
wee thinke it good that the Bysshope or other ordinaries of the
diocesse be moved by you in ow^r name to directe commandement to
the Curates or ministers in all churches to exhort the parishioners
to gyve there common almes at theire churches and to provide remedy
against suche as have welth and will not contribut at the churches
upon exhortacon and admonicon, and thereunto, wee require you to gyve
yor adyes and assistance in every parishe where yo^r dwellinge is,
and by yo^r good example incorage others in this charitable good dede
etc.[114]"

[114] _Journals_, XIX. f. 171 _b_.

Thus before 1569 the Privy Council find it necessary to enforce
measures for the relief of the poor, though not to any very great
extent. Their interference occurs especially in years of scarcity,
and forms part of a series of measures undertaken with the object of
preserving order.

[Sidenote: 5. Legislation concerning the relief of the poor during the
reign of Henry VIII.]

We have now to see what was the course of legislation during this
period, although legislation was not the factor which was most
important in creating the system of poor relief before 1569. Not only
did the regulations of the advanced towns suggest the provisions of the
statutes, but even when the statutes were passed, there is not much
evidence that they were enforced, except when the town government was
vigorous. They are important, not so much because of their immediate
effect, as because they led to the later legislation of Elizabeth, and
because they are authoritative expressions of the opinion of the time.

During the reign of Henry VIII. two statutes were passed. The 22 Henry
VIII. cap. 12, was designed to prevent those who were not really
impotent from begging, and to punish more effectively the able-bodied
vagrant.

The preamble states, that the number of vagabonds was not "in any part
diminished but rather daily augmented and increased." In the country,
the justices of the peace and, in the towns, the mayors, bailiffs etc.
were the officers responsible for the execution of the statute. They
were ordered to search for the impotent poor of their districts and to
give them letters authorising them to beg within certain limits. All
beggars who begged outside the specified limits or without a license
were to be put in the stocks. The impotent beggars were thus confined
to a particular neighbourhood but were allowed under restrictions to
beg for their subsistence. Poor scholars, shipwrecked mariners, and
released prisoners might only beg if properly licensed. Otherwise
they, or any other "valiant beggars," were to be taken to any justice
or to the high constable, and by order of these authorities were to
be whipped in the nearest market town. After punishment the vagrants
had to swear to return to the place where they were born or last dwelt
three years, and there to work for their living. A certificate was to
be furnished to each of them stating the place and day of punishment,
the place where the beggar was to go and the time he was allowed to get
there. While on the way he was free from whipping, but if he exceeded
his time or went elsewhere he was liable to be whipped whenever caught.
Not only were able-bodied beggars punished, but those who gave alms to
them were also to be fined, although the old practice of giving doles
was allowed to continue, and the masters and governors of hospitals
were excluded from the operation of the Act.

The main principles of the statute are identical with those enacted
under Richard II., but the directions are much more detailed. Moreover
provision was also made for the punishment of the inhabitants of any
district where the statute was not executed. The regulations adopted
are very similar to those already in force in London, where impotent
beggars were already badged and sturdy ones whipped at the cart's tail.

The provisions are chiefly repressive; designed to limit the number
of beggars rather than to provide relief. For this reason therefore
they were not effectual, and a second statute (27 Hen. VIII. c. 25)
was passed also in this reign. This Act was probably drawn up by Henry
himself and is similar to measures passed at almost exactly the same
time in France and Scotland. The preamble refers to the former statute
and states that, "forasmuch as it was not provided what was to be done
when the sturdy beggars and impotent poor arrived in their hundreds nor
how the inhabitants were to be charged for their relief and for keeping
at work the able-bodied, it is now ordered that the authorities of
the Cities, Shires, etc." are to "charitably receive" the beggars and
relieve them "by way of voluntary and charitable alms in such wise that
none of them shall be compelled to wander idly and openly ask alms."
The same officers are also to compel the valiant beggars to be kept at
continual labour so that they may earn their own living.

Very few people were excepted from the operation of these provisions.
Beggars with letters, travelling home at the rate of ten miles a day,
are to be relieved; lepers and bedridden people may remain where
they are; friars mendicant may beg and receive as they have been
accustomed; and servants, leaving their service and having letters
to that effect, may be free for a month from the operation of the
statute. But with these exceptions, all who have not work or property
were to be set to work or relieved. Authority was also given for the
compulsory apprenticing of vagrant children, between the ages of five
and fourteen, and thus for the first time this prominent feature of
the later administration of poor relief appears in a statute. The
execution of these provisions involved considerable expenditure, and
the Act therefore proceeds to provide for the raising of funds. The
Mayor or Governor of every city, borough and town corporate, and the
churchwardens, with two others of every parish, were to collect alms
every Sunday. This plan is similar to that already adopted in London
where, in 1533, the aldermen were ordered to supervise the Sunday
collections for the poor. There was no attempt at compulsion, but
parsons, vicars and curates, when preaching, hearing confessions or
making wills were to exhort people to be liberal. Certain games were
forbidden by the same Act and the fines for breaking this or any part
of the statutes were to go to the poor.

Alms were not to be given by the individual to any casual beggar but
were to be placed in a common box, and doles were to be given only in
the same fashion. As a rule each parish thus supported its own poor,
but rich parishes were to help poor ones when necessary. Although a
great deal of restriction was placed upon the casual almsgiver by these
regulations there were many loopholes by which he might still evade the
law. It remained lawful to relieve fellow parishioners, shipwrecked
mariners and blind or lame people, lying by the wayside. Moreover
certain poor people might be authorised to collect broken meat.
Noblemen might give to anyone and abbots and friars were commanded to
give as before.

This statute is the first in which the state not only enacts that the
poor shall be provided for in their own neighbourhood, but also makes
itself responsible for the administration of relief and the raising of
funds. At the same time the clause, which provided that all alms were
to be voluntary and that if they were insufficient the officers were
not to be fined, made the Act only permissive in practice, for it could
only be enforced when the inhabitants of a district chose voluntarily
to provide the necessary money.

In this statute, as in the 22 Hen. VIII. c. 12, a double set of
officials for the administration of the law is provided. The funds
were to be raised in every parish, but the mayor, as well as the
churchwardens, was responsible for the collection of the parochial
alms in the towns, and the municipal officers were the people who were
mainly responsible for receiving and relieving the vagabonds and poor
within their jurisdictions. Thus, not only do these two statutes make
general the practices which existed in London before the statutes were
passed, but they also place their execution in the hands of the same
authorities. So far, however, the orders of both Parliament and the
towns were directed far more to the repression of beggars than to the
collection and administration of funds for the relief of the poor.
Legislators seem to have thought that sufficient funds already existed,
or could be easily collected, and carefully avoided all approach to
compulsory payments for this purpose.

[Sidenote: 6. The two earlier statutes of Edward VI.]

After the dissolution of the monasteries this was no longer the case.
No other statute was passed in Henry's reign, but between 1547 and 1569
there were many and, as a rule, these relate chiefly to expedients for
raising money.

A statute of 1547, however, relates mainly to vagrants[115]. It
provided that a sturdy beggar might be made a slave for two years,
and if he ran away a slave for life. The sons of vagrants also might
be apprenticed until they were twenty-four, and the daughters until
they were twenty, while the punishment of rebellion was slavery.
This Act is often condemned as being the most severe Act of a savage
series. It is, however, quite possible that it was not considered so
savage in 1547. It must be remembered, that under the existing law
an "incorrigible rogue" was punishable with death[116], and that this
very punishment of servitude is suggested in More's _Utopia_ as a much
milder and better punishment than death for both petty thieves and
vagrants. The regulation certainly altogether failed, for this part of
the statute was repealed two years later: so far as able-bodied beggars
were concerned, the 22 Hen. VIII. c. 12 was reenacted and the whipping
punishment there provided remained in force until 1572.

[115] 1 Edw. VI. c. 3.

[116] More's _Utopia_, Pitt Press ed. pp. 40, 41, 44. The suggestion
to make vagabonds public servants is put into the mouth of Cardinal
Moreton.

The statute of 1547 also made some additions to the provision for the
impotent poor. Cottages were to be erected for their habitation, and
they were to be relieved or cured. This clause was again reenacted
by the second statute concerning the poor of Edward's reign[117]. At
the same time the apprenticeship regulations were made less severe,
and justices were empowered to liberate children on any proof of the
misconduct of master or mistress.

[117] 3 and 4 Edw. VI. c. 16.

The next poor law of the reign[118] chiefly concerns the collection of
funds, and was passed in 1551-2.

[118] 5 and 6 Edw. VI. c. 2.

[Sidenote: 7. Legislation between 1551 and 1569.]

The officers responsible for the execution of the statute were
sometimes municipal and sometimes parochial. The mayor or head officer
was to act in the towns; the parson and churchwardens in the country.
These officers were ordered to call the householders together and to
nominate two collectors who were to gather the alms of the parish, and
it is provided that the collectors "shall gentellie aske" of every man
what he will consent to give weekly for the relief of the poor. The
various sums were to be entered in a book and collected every Sunday.
If any man refused to give, he was to be exhorted by the parson, and,
if the parson failed to persuade him, he was to be sent to the Bishop.
The Bishop was to induce him to contribute and "according to his
discretyon take order for the reformacon therof[119]." The Bishop was
also to see to the proper employment of sums granted to the poor by
Henry VIII., unless they had been taken away by an Act of Parliament.
This same statute also enacted that none were "to goo or sitt openlie
a begging," but in this respect was in advance of the time, for
during Mary's reign licensed beggars were again allowed[120], though
the remaining provisions of this statute were continued or reenacted
several times before 1563[121]. Early in the reign of Elizabeth,
however, a fresh step is taken towards the enforcement of compulsory
poor rates. The 5 Eliz. c. 3 originated in the House of Lords, and
may have been due to the fact that the Bishops found unavailing their
exhortations to stingy parishioners[122]. When a person obstinately
refused to give to the poor after the Bishop had duly exhorted him, he
might be bound by a recognisance of £10 to appear before the justices
of the peace in the country or the mayor, bailiff, &c. in the towns.
The justices or mayors were to "charitably and gentelly perswade and
move the said obstinate persons" to extend his or their charity towards
the relief of the poor of the parish where they dwelt. If any of them
again refused, the justices of the peace or mayor and churchwardens
might assess what sum he should pay weekly; if he still remained
obdurate he might be imprisoned.

[119] At Lambeth there is a register book made in accordance with
the provisions of this Act. It is entitled "A Register Booke of the
Benivolence of the Parishioners for the Reliefe of the Pore made in
A^o VI. Regis Edwardi VI^{ti}, etc." It states that it was "a register
booke gevyne by master Ambroose Wylles, gentylman, unto the churche of
Lambethe, wherein it is declared the benyvolence of the paryshoners of
Lambethe aforsaid towards the releiffe of the poore inhabitors there
... particularlye every man's name and what his devosyon is to geve
weklye towards the sustentacion of yher poore neyghbours according to
the king's highness prosedyngs, &c."

Master Parson gave for half a year 10_s._, and my lady Bridgwater 6_s._
8_d._ during the year. The book states that "On Sundaye October 30th
there was nothing distrybuted because that Master Wylles did extend his
charitye among the poore householders," and "on Sundaye the 6th day
of Auguste master parsone did give his cheritye to the poor people."
Denne, _Addenda to the History of Lambeth_, p. 392.

[120] 2 and 3 Ph. and Mary, c. 5.

[121] 7 Edw. VI. c. 11, 1 Mary St. 2, c. 13, 1 Mary St. 3, c. 12
all continue 5 and 6 Edw. VI. c. 2. The 2 and 3 Ph. and Mary, c. 5,
restates and re-enacts the substance of the chief provisions of this
Edwardian statute, and was continued by 4 and 5 Ph. and Mary, c. 9.

[122] The interrogatories issued by the Bishop of Norwich in
1561, before his visitation of his diocese, are similar to other
interrogatories of the time, and indicate the way in which the bishops
discharged their functions with regard to the relief of the poor. The
Bishop of Norwich enquired of the priests "whether they doo exhorte
the people to remember the poore after the homelye when they reade
the sentences exhorting the Almose." He enquired of the churchwardens
"whether they know any man that refuseth to contribute to the Almes of
the poore as a thing not rightlie appointed and discorageth other from
such charitable Almes?"

There were also questions as to whether a strong chest had been
provided for "the poore men's boxe," and whether it had been fastened
in a fit place. Other enquiries concerned the dues of the poor, such
as the payments that had formerly been made for lights out of movable
property and the fines of those who did not go to church. "Injunctions
of John, Bishop of Norwich," 2nd May, 1561.

The part taken by the bishops must have been of very considerable
importance, even when they acted only on the ecclesiastical side, and
it often happened that the bishops took a considerable share in the
general organisation of relief. Bishop Ridley, as we have seen, took
the leading part in the foundation of three out of the four royal
hospitals of London. This action of the bishop was exercised on the
lines laid down in the statutes, was recommended by the letter of the
Privy Council to the rulers of London in 1569, and was used to develop
the organisation of the towns. It serves to link every part of the new
organisation with the old methods of relief, but became less and less
important as more and more compulsion became necessary for the raising
of the funds.

It was in this hesitating way that the law first resorted to
compulsory payments for the poor. The utmost care is taken to make the
contribution as voluntary as possible and only to resort to force when
much persuasion had proved ineffectual. Even then compulsion might only
be resorted to in the case of obstinate individuals; it was not legally
permissible to assess the amount that everyone should give until 1572.

[Sidenote: 8. Summary.]

This statute of 1563 was the last enactment dealing with poor relief
passed before 1569. In principle, legislation has altered little
since the second statute of Henry VIII. In 1569, as in 1535-6, a
sharp distinction is drawn between the able-bodied beggars and the
impotent. The former are to be whipped and sent to their parish to
work; the latter are to be provided for by their fellow parishioners.
In both periods also the state appointed municipal or parochial
officials to collect funds and to relieve the poor. But there is a
great difference in the details of the statutes. The laws of Edward
VI. and the first statute of Elizabeth concerning the poor carefully
state who are responsible for the execution of each part of the Act
and provide penalties for neglect. The two statutes of Henry VIII.
are more detailed than the statutes of Richard II. but they were not
detailed enough; the enactments of Edward, Mary and Elizabeth add
still more precise provisions to secure the better execution of the
law[123]. But there is an even greater difference with regard to funds.
The laws of Henry presuppose that the poor will obtain sufficient
relief from voluntary alms; the statutes of Edward VI. and Mary
prescribe the persuasion, and those of Elizabeth the compulsion of the
contributors. Society had become too complicated for individual action
to be effectual either in restraining idle beggars or in relieving
the helpless poor: the duty was therefore undertaken by the state. It
seemed at first as if the old voluntary character of the gift could
be maintained, but this was soon found to be impossible. Throughout
this period, so far as legislation is concerned, an approximation
to compulsory poor rates accompanies the increase of the public
administration of relief.

[123] It was evidently difficult to induce men to become collectors.
The time of their election was often changed, and the fines for
refusing to serve continuously increased. This amounted to 20_s._ in
the 5 and 6 Edw. VI. c. 2, to 40_s._ in 2 and 3 Ph. and Mary, c. 5, and
to £10 in 5 Eliz. c. 3.




CHAPTER V.

REVIEW OF THE GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF PUBLIC POOR RELIEF, 1514-1569.

  1. The action of municipal rulers precedes the action of Parliament.
  2. Advantages of the municipal system of relief.
  3. Connection between the municipal organisation of poor relief and
the dissolution of the monasteries.
  4. Relation of beggary to first schemes of relief.
  5. Parental government.
  6. Bridewell, the keystone of the system.


[Sidenote: 1. The action of the rulers of particular towns precedes the
action of Parliament.]

Before 1569 no effectual system of poor relief had been established,
but many experiments had been made. At the beginning of the century
a serious problem was before the Government. The social changes of
the time had resulted in the formation of crowds of vagrants, and
the greater complexity of economic conditions made the position of
the workfolk more unstable. Even in ordinary times, therefore, the
vagabonds were a constant plague to the peaceful citizen, and when
corn was dear or work was slack the greater number of the inhabitants
of particular districts, being without resources, joined in riots
or rose in insurrections. There were then no Friendly Societies or
workmen's clubs, and no casual wards or workhouses. Years of scarcity
were therefore always times of disorder and the peace of the whole
country was threatened. Assistance given by means of private charity,
monasteries and hospitals failed to relieve the distress or to remedy
the evil. Force was tried; thieves were hanged and vagabonds were
whipped. But, even as early as 1515, Sir Thomas More saw that the
root of the evil was much deeper, "Neither ther is any punishment so
horrible, that it can kepe them from stealynge, which have no other
craft, whereby to get their living[124]."

[124] More's _Utopia_, p. 28. Pitt Press edition.

Even before 1569 the statutes had appointed authorities both for the
collection of funds and for the distribution of relief, and had made
contributions to the poor compulsory. But, on the whole, the practice
of London and certain other towns was in advance of the regulations
of the statutes; the main feature of the period is the municipal
organisation of poor relief. London in 1547 and Ipswich in 1557 had
made regulations for levying compulsory payments for the poor, long
before any statute had authorised the exaction of compulsory payments
for this purpose. Nor is this the only matter in which the regulations
of the towns seem to suggest the provisions of the statutes. Before
the 22 Hen. VIII. had ordered vagabonds to be whipped at the cart's
tail, London vagabonds had been so treated; before the 27 Hen. VIII.
had ordered the collection of alms for the poor on Sunday by municipal
and parochial authority, that method had been adopted in London.
London, Cambridge, and Ipswich had, before 1569, built up an elaborate
organisation for dealing with the poor, an organisation that seemed
complete, but failed because it was municipal and not national.

The history of the legislation of the time thus shows that the Tudor
Poor Laws did not, like modern Factory Acts, initiate regulations never
before enforced. On the contrary, the provisions of these statutes
reveal the beginnings of the national system, following the same
line of development as that which had already been reached by many
particular towns.

[Sidenote: 2. Advantages of the municipal system of relief.]

There were some advantages connected with this independent municipal
action, which is thus characteristic of the relief of the poor before
1569. It was possible for the central Government to estimate the
practical effect of their measures before they became law, because they
were already probably adopted in some towns.

Another advantage that belonged to the municipal organisation of the
times was the close connection that existed between the authorities who
administered poor relief and those who administered charities. Most of
the London charities seem to have belonged either to the parishes or to
the Companies. The parochial charities were administered by authorities
closely connected with those responsible for the public system of poor
relief in the parishes, and the City charities were administered by
authorities closely connected with the public system of poor relief in
the City. Moreover the work of all the parishes was controlled by the
same central authority.

[Sidenote: 3. Connection between the municipal organisation of poor
relief and the dissolution of the monasteries.]

The connection between the municipal organisation of poor relief and
the dissolution of the monasteries is not altogether clear. Long
before 1536 the difficulty of repressing beggars was serious, and the
alms of the townsfolk were wasted upon unworthy recipients. Between
1514 and 1533 London had already taken measures both to restrain and
license its beggars and to collect alms for the poor. It is probable,
that had the monasteries continued to exist, these measures must have
extended. But the existence of the doles of the monasteries was in
itself an obstacle to the better government of beggars, because the
relief given by them was in no way controlled by the same authorities.
In London the hospital of Savoy preserved during the reign of Mary an
independent existence, side by side with the hospitals under central
management, and we find that the City authorities complained of even
this one hospital, and said the beggars there relieved were a cause of
disorder, and a hindrance to the good government of the City. Had all
the old monasteries and hospitals maintained an independent existence
it is difficult to see how the regulations of the town rulers could
have had much effect, unless the religious endowments also had been
subject to municipal control. Moreover the monasteries had relieved
many poor at their gates, and among the monks and nuns themselves were
probably many who were unfit for the battle of life. These people had
to be provided for as well as the unrelieved poor of former days.
The immediate need was therefore greater after 1536 than it had
been before. At the same time responsibility in the matter fell more
directly on the citizens. While the old religious foundations existed,
it was supposed that they ought to provide for the poor; now they
were destroyed, the responsibility must be fixed elsewhere. It was
the citizens whom Latimer and Lever blamed for neglect. Moreover some
of the spoils of the dissolution fell into the hands of the municipal
rulers, and sometimes they were charged with administering them for the
use of the poor. This would certainly facilitate their action and would
perhaps lead them to consider the relief of the poor especially as a
municipal duty. Something of the kind seems to have happened at York,
and possibly also at Cambridge.

In any case it is certain that, after 1536, the citizens of London set
themselves much more vigorously to work to deal with the poor; that the
royal hospitals were founded partly from the dissolved monasteries,
and that the foundation of these hospitals first led to the compulsory
taxation of 1547 for the poor in London, and called into existence
the governors for the poor. Municipal care for the poor therefore
existed before the dissolution of the monasteries, but became much more
extensive afterwards, both because the need was greater and because the
rival authority was suppressed.

[Sidenote: 4. Relation of beggary to first schemes of relief.]

The close relation between beggars and the new system of poor relief
is also apparent. The first efforts of Town Councils and Parliament
were occasioned by the great increase in the number of begging poor;
the earliest orders concern the punishment of able-bodied beggars; the
others were left to voluntary charity. But the able-bodied beggars
were sometimes unable to obtain work and the impotent beggars were
sometimes unrelieved. The system of the royal hospitals of the City of
London was founded by the City rulers to meet these difficulties. They
considered especially three kinds of beggars; children, sturdy beggars,
and the impotent poor; they built or refounded all the hospitals in
order to provide for one or other of these classes. Occasionally
begging was forbidden altogether, but as a rule beggars were not
altogether banished, but some of them were provided for in hospitals
or by pensions, and the rest were licensed. As soon as the system was
established, even as early as 1557, the distinction between beggars
and other poor was clearly seen and recognised, but still, it is true,
that the organisation first grew up in order to lessen the number of
vagabonds, and chiefly concerned beggars.

[Sidenote: 5. Parental government.]

Still the regulations of the town rulers were not entirely confined
to beggars. The articles, drawn up "at the meting of the towneship of
Burye the XIIII^{th} daie of Januarye 1570" (1571), illustrate the
sort of family duty recognised by the municipalities towards their
members, and the corresponding right of interfering with individual
freedom. After commanding everyone to go to church on Sunday, the next
regulation orders every person "suspected of loytring" to declare to
the constable every Sunday in the morning "where he wrought everie daie
in the said weeke," and "if any labourer shall not be provided of worke
on the Sondaie for the weeke following, then the curate or cunstable
to move the parishe for worke." The burgesses also order a certain
Agnes Servall to go to service before Easter and in the meantime "to
keep her church on the sabbath days. If she failed to do so both mother
and daughter were to be whipped[125]." The town discipline was severe
however much the parental rulers might look after the welfare of all
the inhabitants. The relief of the poor was very closely connected
with parental government of this kind. But both the suppression of
beggars and the exercise of this family responsibility on the part of
municipality or state involved means of coercion.

[125] _Hist. Man. Com._, Rep. XIV., App. VIII. p. 139.

It was also ordered that "every spynster to have (if it may be) vi^{lb}
of wolle everye weeke, and to bringe the same home every Saterdaie
at night, and if any faile so to doe, the clothier to advertise the
cunstable thereof for the examynacion of the cause and to punyshe it
according to the qualitye of the falte." Moreover no poor person was
"to be suffered to kepe their childrene at home able to serve."

[Sidenote: 6. Bridewell.]

The institution of Bridewell was therefore the keystone of the whole
system. Vagrants were not reformed by whipping or by the fear of
hanging, because they preferred to run the chance of capture when
starvation was the alternative. Unorganised almsgiving failed even
more conspicuously. But organised relief accompanied by a House of
Correction was a step towards the solution of the problem. It also was
in full harmony with the parental idea of government and the practice
of state regulation of economic matters which existed throughout the
reigns of the Tudors and earlier Stuarts.

The creation of the first Bridewell and the organisation depending
upon it was the work of the citizens of London. It needed great
liberality: gifts were then for the most part voluntary, and the result
shows considerable public spirit on the part of the richer classes
and a great sense of the corporate unity of the City by the whole
body of citizens. It is true that the liberality did not last; that
the isolated action of single towns could not deal with a national
difficulty, but the town rulers began to make experiments, to train
officials and to create the custom of relieving the poor. They did not
themselves succeed in solving the problem, but without their incomplete
regulations the national organisation of the future would hardly have
been possible.




CHAPTER VI.

1569-1597. PARLIAMENT AND THE PRIVY COUNCIL.

  A. _Parliamentary History._
    1. Discussions, Bills and Statutes between 1566 and 1576.
    2. Parliamentary history between 1576 and 1597.
    3. The Bills and Statutes of 1597.
    4. General features of the discussion in Parliament.

  B. _The action of the Privy Council._
    5. The chief characteristics of the action of the Privy Council.
    6. The whipping campaign.
    7. The scarcity measures.
    8. The influence of the Privy Council on
      (1) the Mayor and Corporation of London,
      (2) other local officials.


The action of municipal authorities in particular towns, which, before
1569, is the main feature in the development in the English system of
poor relief, becomes of relatively less importance after that date.

Matters concerning the poor attract increased notice in Parliament
and the statutes become more definite and more effective until 1597.
An enactment was then passed, the provisions of which, as re-enacted
in 1601, have remained almost unaltered until the present century.
The leading feature therefore of the period from 1569 to 1597 is the
improvement in legislation. But besides the improvement in legislation
we must notice the pressure exercised by the Privy Council on the
justices of the peace. This becomes more operative and frequent
throughout the reign of Elizabeth, but before 1597 it had not attained
anything like the same degree of success that it was destined to
achieve under Charles I. At the same time local organisation must not
be altogether neglected, and now the measures of the justices in the
country are important as well as the orders of the towns.

We will consider, therefore, so far as they affect the poor, first, the
Parliamentary history from 1569 to 1597; secondly, the action of the
Privy Council; lastly, some of the more important local measures and
the events of the concluding years of the period 1594 to 1597.

[Sidenote: A. Parliamentary history.]

The history of the Bills, committees and debates in Parliament in the
period from 1569 to 1597 shows very clearly that the English Poor
Law did not come by chance, but was the result of the thought and
experience of the greatest men of the time. Their discussions make us
realise, that in those days, as in ours, opinion was much divided on
the subject, and that in matters concerning the poor it is particularly
true that there is very little new under the sun. The earlier part of
the parliamentary history of the question circles round the statutes
of 1572 and 1576, the later round the code of 1597. Between these two
dates there were some slight alterations and additions to the law and a
decided change in opinion and feeling.

[Sidenote: 1. Discussions, Bills and Statutes between 1566 and 1576.]

In 1566, we find notes in Cecil's handwriting on a scheme for
preventing a dearth of grain and on the definition of the word
"vagabond." He jots down the words "bearwardes," "Tynkers" and
"pedlars," as if he were the author of the definition[126] of
"vagabond" that was to cause so much difference of opinion in 1572.

[126] _Dom. State Papers Queen Eliz._, vol. 41, No. 76. See p. 69.

These notes were possibly the basis of two Bills which were introduced
into Parliament in the session of 1566. One concerned the punishment of
vagabonds and loiterers and was introduced into the House of Commons;
the other concerned the provision of grain and was considered by
the Lords[127]. In neither case did the Bills become law, but it is
worth noticing that the question of the provision of grain had been
discussed in Parliament as in 1572, and in 1586 the Privy Council
again took action in the matter. In 1571 a new Bill, concerning the
punishment of vagabonds and the relief of the poor was introduced,
and there was an interesting debate on the first reading[128]. One of
the chief speakers, Mr Sands, subsequently took a considerable part
in the discussion of 1597. He considered that this Bill of 1571 was
"over-sharp and bloody" and thought that milder measures would be more
successful. If justices would take the trouble, he said, every man
might be relieved at his own home: this was clearly feasible because
it was actually done in the county of Worcester. Sir Francis Knollys
also spoke and was on the sterner side. He would have had a Bridewell
in every town, and have had it maintained by a fine of twelvepence from
every "Tippler[129]." This is a good illustration of the way in which
Bridewell, an institution originally peculiar to London, influenced the
discussions in Parliament and was there suggested as a type or model
for similar institutions throughout the country.

[127] D'Ewes' _Journals_, pp. 112, 132.

[128] D'Ewes' _Journals_, p. 165.

[129] I.e. keeper of a public-house.

Another speaker was Mr Thomas Wilson, to whom we owe the organisation
of the Record office of his time. Like a modern secretary of the
Charity Organisation Society he told his hearers that "it was no
charity, to give to such a one, as we know not, being a stranger unto
us."

No statute followed this discussion of 1571, but when Parliament again
met in 1572 a Bill was brought into the House of Lords which finally
became law. The main feature of the debate in 1572 was a dispute
between the Lords and the Commons as to the definition of the word
"vagabond." The definition in the Act includes[130] (1) proctors or
procurators; (2) persons "using subtyll craftye unlawful Games" and
"fayninge themselves to have knowledge in Phisnomye, Palmestrye, and
other abused Scyences"; (3) all able-bodied persons not having either
"land or maister" who cannot give a satisfactory account of their
means of livelihood; (4) all "fencers, Bearewardes, Comon Players in
Enterludes and minstrels" not belonging to a Baron or other honourable
person of greater degree and all "Juglers, Pedlars, Tynkers and Petye
Chapmen" unless the bearwards, tinkers etc. were licensed by two
justices of the peace; (5) common labourers, able to work, who refuse
to work for the customary wages; (6) all counterfeiters of passes and
all who use them knowing them to be counterfeit; (7) all scholars of
Oxford and Cambridge who beg without being licensed by Chancellor
or Vice-Chancellor; (8) all shipmen not properly licensed; (9) all
liberated prisoners who beg without a license, and lastly (10) all
persons declared vagabonds by the clauses of the Act which concern
the impotent poor. A great many people were thus affected by the Act;
the unauthorised beggar, the workman on strike, the poor scholar at
the Universities, unless he were duly licensed, and the shipwrecked
mariner, as well as the fortune-teller and the proctor or collector of
subscriptions. All these were abandoned to their fate, but the clause
concerning the suppression of "minstrells, bearwards, pedlers etc."
caused a dispute between the Lords and the Commons[131]. These men took
the place which shops, circuses and newspapers occupy in the life of
to-day, and their total suppression would have meant a considerable
loss in the country life of Merry England. After discussion the two
houses agreed upon a compromise; it was arranged that these people
should be allowed if licensed by two justices of the peace, and the
Bill became law as the 14 Eliz. c. 5.

[130] 14 Eliz. c. 5.

[131] D'Ewes' _Journals_, p. 220.

The regulations concerning vagrants are severe, more severe than in any
other Act except the slavery statute of 1547. For a first offence, a
vagabond was to be whipped and bored through the ear, unless someone
would become surety for him and keep him in service for a year. For a
second offence, he was to be adjudged a felon, unless he could find a
surety who would take him into his service for two years; and for a
third offence the vagrant was to be adjudged a felon without clergy and
might be punished with death[132].

[132] This Act of 1572 was at certain times rigorously enforced. Thus
at Middlesex Sessions held June, 17 Eliz. Thomas Maynerde, Oswald
Thompson and John Barres were brought before the magistrates. On the
18 March in the same year they had been whipped and burnt through the
ear at the Old Bailey; they were now accused of "being over 18 years
old and fit for labour, but masterless and without any lawful means of
livelihood." They pleaded guilty and were sentenced to be hung. Also on
the 6 Feb. 18 Eliz. a woman was tried for vagrancy and committed for
two years to a surety who was her husband, to be his servant. She was
again found wandering, and in October of the same year was sentenced
to be hung. In the ten weeks between 6 Oct. 32 Eliz. and 14 Dec. 33
Eliz. seventy-one persons were sentenced at Middlesex Sessions to be
whipped and branded for vagrancy. Middlesex Sessions Roll, ed. T. C.
Jeaffreson, pp. 94 and 191.

Special regulations refer to some of the pauper immigrants of the
time. In the days of Elizabeth these came chiefly, not from the
Continent, but from Ireland and the Isle of Man. The unfortunate people
were to be punished as sturdy vagrants and sent home again, while the
people who brought them over were to be fined twenty shillings for each
immigrant.

But "forasmuche as Charitye would that poore, aged and impotent persons
should as necessarylye be provided for, as the said Roges, Vacabondes
and Sturdye beggars repressed" the clauses of the enactment deal
with relief as well as with repression. The justices of the peace
were to make a register of the names of the poor in every parish and
habitations were to be found for them. Every month the mayor and high
constable were to make search for the strange poor and were to send
them back to their own neighbourhood.

When the poor had been thus settled the justices in the country
and mayors in the towns were to estimate how much it would cost to
maintain them. They were then "by their good discretions" to "taxe and
assesse all and every the Inhabitauntes," dwelling in their divisions,
"to suche weekely charge as they and everye of them shall weekely
contribute towardes the Releef of the said poore People."

The mayors and justices were also to appoint collectors and overseers,
and the "obstinate person" who refused to contribute was to be brought
before two justices and sent to gaol unless he became obedient.

Thus the Act of 1572 does not enforce compulsory payments in the
case of obstinate individuals only, like the statute of 1562-3; it
also enforces the compulsory payment of an assessed sum upon all
the parishioners. The admonition of the bishop is succeeded by the
compulsion of the law. This clause of the Act, however, still expresses
hesitation; if the parishioner failed to pay, the poor rate could
not be immediately distrained; the offender must be brought before
two justices and if he remained disobedient was to be sent to gaol.
The old theory, that gifts for the poor were good for the giver and
should be voluntary, thus still left its traces though henceforward the
compulsory poor rate was a part of English law.

In this respect the statute merely adopts a principle which we
have seen was already enforced in some of the towns, and its chief
regulations do not in any way alter the control of relief exercised by
the municipal authorities. On the contrary, the mayors or other head
officers are expressly ordered to take the initiative in the towns and
are made legally responsible for the execution of the law.

Although the clauses against vagabonds are so unusually severe in this
statute the provision for the employment of the poor is very small.
This deficiency was therefore supplied by an Act passed four years
afterwards.

[Sidenote: 18 Eliz. c. 3.]

By a statute passed in the Parliament of 1575-6 a stock of wool,
flax, hemp, iron or other stuff was to be provided in every city and
corporate town and in every market town when thought necessary by the
justices "to the Intente Yowthe may be accustomed and brought up to
Laboure and Worke, and then not lyke to growe to bee ydle Roges and to
the Entente also that suche as bee alredye growen up in ydlenes and so
Roges at this present maye not have any juste excuse in sayeng they
cannot get any Service or Worcke ... and that other poore and needye
persons being willinge to worcke maye bee set on worcke." Moreover
Houses of Correction were to be built in every county and thither were
to be sent all who refused to do the work provided for them[133].

[133] 18 Eliz. c. 3.

These two Acts of 1572 and 1576 were three times continued[134] and
remained the basis of the English Poor Law until the whole question
was reopened and thoroughly discussed in 1597. In 1593, however, the
clauses relating to the death, imprisonment and boring through the ear
of vagabonds were repealed and the whipping punishments of the 22 Hen.
VIII. were again revived[135].

[134] 27 Eliz. c. 11; 29 Eliz. c. 5; 31 Eliz. c. 10.

[135] 35 Eliz. c. 7.

[Sidenote: 2. Legislation between 1576 and 1597.]

Between 1576 and 1597 three other statutes were passed dealing with
special aspects of the subject. The 31 Eliz. c. 7 was designed to
prevent an increasing number of poor families from settling in the
country. Only one family might live in one house and no house was to be
built in the country unless it had four acres of land attached[136].
The 35 Eliz. c. 6 was passed to prevent an increasing number of
poor families from settling in London. In the cities of London and
Westminster and for three miles round no new houses were to be built
except for people who were assessed in the subsidy book at £5 in goods
or £3 in lands. No existing houses were to be divided into tenements
and no "inmates[137]" were to be received.

[136] Exceptions were made in favour of cottages built within a mile
of the sea or a navigable river, and of those built for the use of
shepherds, forest rangers, workmen employed in mineral works, quarries
or mines or impotent poor allowed by the justices.

[137] I.e. lodgers.

A third Act also passed in 1592-3 made special provision for soldiers
and sailors. They were ordered to return to their own neighbourhoods,
and the justices were empowered to levy an additional rate for their
relief, which was to be distributed to them by Treasurers appointed in
every county for the purpose[138].

[138] 35 Eliz. c. 4.

But it was in 1597 that the many aspects of legislation affecting the
poor were thoroughly discussed.

[Sidenote: 3. The Bills and Statutes of 1597.]

During the years from 1594 to 1597 there was a great dearth of corn and
the price rose in some cases to four or five times the average price of
the preceding years. There were rebellions in many parts of the country
and great distress in all. Parliament met on the 24th Oct. 1597 and the
first measure read a first time by the House of Commons was one dealing
with forestallers, regrators and engrossers of corn[139]. Francis Bacon
then spoke about enclosures. For "Inclosure of grounds," he said,
"brings depopulation, which brings first Idleness; secondly decay
of Tillage; thirdly subversion of Houses and decay of charity, and
charges to the Poor; fourthly impoverishing the state of the realm."
He therefore brought forward two Bills on the subject, "not drawn with
a polished pen, but with a polished heart, free from affection and
affectation[140]." A committee was appointed to consider the matter,
which was to meet in the Exchequer Chamber in the afternoon of the same
day.

[139] D'Ewes' _Journals_, p. 551.

[140] D'Ewes' _Journals_, p. 551. Sir Francis Bacon "had perused the
Preambles of former statutes, and by them did see the inconvenience
of this matter, being then scarce out of the shell, to be now full
ripened."

Later, Mr Finch addressed the House, "shewing sundry great and horrible
abuses of idle and vagrant persons greatly offensive both to God and
the world; and further shewing the extream and miserable estate of the
Godly and honest sort of the poor Subjects of this realm," and it was
decided that these matters also should be referred to the committee
already appointed for enclosures[141].

[141] _Ib._ p. 552.

A few days later Sir Francis Hastings complained that this committee
had so far "spent all their travel only about the said Inclosures and
Tillage, and nothing about the said rogues and poor[142]." He therefore
asked that Bills on these subjects should be considered by the House.
At least seventeen Bills concerning this matter were brought forward
during the Session of 1597-8, and on Nov. 19th a large and influential
committee was appointed to which thirteen of these Bills were referred.
To this committee belonged some of the most famous men in the House,
for it included amongst its members Sir Francis Bacon, Sir Thomas
Cecil and Sir Edward Coke. There were others also who seem to have
had special knowledge in matters concerning the poor, such as Edward
Hext, a justice of Somerset, who had already written a long letter to
Cecil concerning vagabonds; and Sir Thomas Wroth, who seems to have
been the special champion of the poor[143]. Their meetings were held
in the Middle Temple Hall and continued for the greater part of the
Session[144].

[142] _Ib._ p. 555. Friday, 11 Nov. 1597.

[143] A resolution on the 25 Feb. 31 Eliz. was also proposed by him to
the effect that if any one should depart before the rising of the House
of the Speaker he should pay sixpence "to the use of the poor." D'Ewes'
_Journals_, p. 439. He also introduced the statute of 1601. Townshend's
_Historical Collections_.

[144] _Ib._ p. 559.

The titles of twelve of the Bills then considered give us some idea of
the many sides of the question that were then discussed. The following
drafts were submitted; the Bill for "erecting of Houses of Correction
and punishment of rogues and sturdy beggars and for levying of certain
sums due to the poor," for the "necessary habitation and relief of the
poor, aged, lame, and blind in every parish," for "relief of Hospitals,
poor prisoners and others impoverished by casual losses," for "supply
of relief unto the poor," for "petite forfeitures," for "the better
relief of souldiers and mariners," for "the better governing of
Hospitals and lands given to the relief of the poor," for "extirpation
of Beggery," "against Bastardy," "for setting the poor on work," and
"for erecting of hospitals or abiding and working houses for the
poor." These Bills concern both the relief of the poor and methods of
dealing with vagrants; so far as the former was concerned the committee
rejected all these proposals and brought in a new Bill of their own.
But the Bill for Houses of Correction was amended in the Commons and
sent up to the Lords[145].

[145] _Ib._ pp. 559 _seq._ Nov. 22nd. Eleven Bills were referred to the
committee, p. 561. Nov. 28th. Bill for erecting hospitals or abiding
and working houses for the poor. Nov. 30th. The new Bill was introduced.

In the Upper House also there was then much discussion. A bill "for
the relief of the poor in time of extream dearth of corn" apparently
originated there[146]. Most interest, however, was excited by the Bill
for Houses of Correction. The Lords appointed one committee to discuss
both Bills and amongst its members were Lord Burghley and Archbishop
Whitgift. Several amendments were proposed by the committee which
were not at first approved by the whole House. The Lord Chief Justice
was therefore consulted and some, if not all, of the additions were
accepted[147]. The Bill was sent down to the House of Commons with the
amendments. The Commons referred the matter to a committee in which Sir
Walter Raleigh took the chief part and which included Francis Bacon,
Wroth and Hext. Raleigh proposed a conference with the Lords on the
subject. The Lords assented to the conference with the proviso that
whatsoever had been amended or added by their Lordships "could not
now be altered by the orders of the House[148]." Sir Walter Raleigh
reported this reply to the Commons but complained of the manner in
which the answer had been delivered, "not using any of their Lordships'
former and wonted courteous manner of coming down towards the members
of this House to the Bar, but all of them sitting still in their
great Estates very solemnly and all covered[149]." A somewhat heated
discussion arose between the two Houses as to the way in which the
Lords should answer the Commons, and perhaps the friction occasioned
by this means contributed to the rejection of the Bill by the Commons
by 106 Noes to 66 Ayes[150]. A new Bill for rogues was hastily passed
through the House and sent up to the Lords.

[146] _Ib._ p. 531.

[147] _Ib._ pp. 533, 534.

[148] D'Ewes' _Journals_, p. 537.

[149] _Ib._ p. 580.

[150] _Ib._ p. 582. Tuesday, 17th Jan. 1597-8.

The final result of all these discussions, Bills, committees and
disputes was a series of Acts dealing with the problems concerning
vagrants and the poor from many different sides.

The most important Act of the series is the 39 Eliz. c. 3, formerly the
Bill for the relief of the Poor which the great committee appointed on
Nov. 19th in the Commons brought in after they had discussed twelve
other Bills on the subject. By this Act the relief of the poor was
placed mainly in the hands of the Churchwardens and four Overseers of
the Poor who were to be appointed every year at Easter by the justices
of the peace. These churchwardens and overseers with the consent of two
justices of the peace were to take such measures as were necessary for
setting poor children to work or binding them apprentice, for providing
the adult unemployed with work by means of a stock of hemp, flax,
wool, thread, iron or other materials and for relieving the impotent,
old and blind. For this last purpose they were empowered to build
Hospitals on waste lands. The funds were to be raised by the taxation
"of every inhabitant and every occupyer of Landes" and the rates might
be levied by distress. An appeal against the assessment might be taken
to Quarter Sessions but the assessment itself was to be made by the
parochial officers with the consent of two justices of the peace. Rich
parishes might be rated in aid of poorer ones and the forfeitures for
negligence, made under the Act, were to go to the use of the poor.
All beggars were declared rogues except those who begged for meat and
victuals in their own parish and soldiers or sailors regularly licensed
who were passing to their settlement.

A county rate was also to be levied on the parishes for the relief
of prisoners and for the support of almshouses and hospitals, and a
Treasurer for the County was to be appointed to administer this relief.
Within corporate towns, the head officers had the same authority as
justices of the peace in the country.

Another Act passed in this year was entitled "An Acte for the
punyshment of Rogues, Vagabonds and Sturdy Beggars[151]."

[151] 39 Eliz. c. 4.

Justices of the peace in Sessions were empowered to take measures for
the erection of Houses of Correction. The old statutes relating to
rogues and Houses of Correction were repealed and vagabonds were now
to be punished by whipping. They were then to be sent to the House of
Correction or gaol belonging to their place of settlement and from
thence were to be placed in service if able-bodied or in an almshouse
if impotent. If the rogue were likely to be dangerous to anyone he was
to be banished, and if he returned was to suffer death. It is a curious
part of this Act that the minister of the parish and one other person
were to assist by their advice with the punishment of these rogues.

The Bill for Hospitals probably resulted in a statute which re-enacted
the old provision that during the next twenty years anyone might found
a hospital or House of Correction etc. by simple enrolment in the Court
of Chancery and without Letters Patent[152]. Another of the thirteen
Bills considered by the committee seems to have become law under the
title of an "Acte to reforme Deceipts and Breaches of Trust towching
Lands given to charitable uses." It was there stated that the lands
appropriated to charitable uses had been misapplied and consequently
power was given to the Lord Chancellor etc. to issue writs to the
Bishop of the Diocese to inquire into any abuses of the kind and "to
set downe such Orders, Judgement and Decrees as the said good, godly
and charitable uses may be truely observed in full ample and most
liberall sort, according to the true intent and meaning of the founders
or donoures thereof[153]."

[152] _Ib._ c. 5.

[153] 39 Eliz. c. 6.

Two enactments of this series concern soldiers; one confirms the
statute of 1592-3 and increases the amount of the rate that justices
might impose for their relief[154]; the other provided especially
severe punishments against soldiers, mariners and idle persons who
wandered "as soldyers or mariners." But on the other hand if a soldier
or sailor could not obtain employment in his parish and applied to two
justices of the peace, they were obliged to find him work and could if
necessary tax the whole hundred for the purpose[155].

[154] _Ib._ c. 21.

[155] _Ib._ c. 17.

The legislation of this year is therefore almost a complete code on
the subject, but by far the most important part was the Act concerning
the relief of the poor. It was only passed as a temporary measure but
was re-enacted with a few alterations four years later. It was in
1597, therefore, and not in 1601 that the whole question was discussed
and that the main features of our English system of poor relief were
legally established.

This statute differs from earlier statutes, not in the creation of
Overseers of the Poor but in making them primarily responsible for
the administration of the law. The Act of 1572 first ordered the
appointment of Overseers or Collectors. But the burden of initiating
measures then rested primarily on the justices of the peace and the
head officials of the town. On the other hand the Act of 1597 ordered
the overseers to take the initiative, though the justices had still to
assent to their proposals and had to see that they did their duty. With
regard, however, to soldiers, vagrants and Houses of Correction the
justices were still mainly responsible.

[Sidenote: 4. General features of the discussion in Parliament.]

For seventy years Parliament had been making legislative experiments
with regard to the public relief of the poor and before 1597 at least
nine different plans had been tried. At last a law was produced which
as re-enacted four years later is unrepealed at the present day and for
more than two centuries was almost unaltered.

Parliament grudged neither its own time nor that of its ablest men to
solve the question. The personal side of the history of the discussion
is interesting. We see Sir Francis Bacon, to use his own phrase, "not
with polished pen but with polished heart," Raleigh neither as courtier
nor sea rover but as a stickler for the privileges of Parliament and
leader of a committee on the poor, Whitgift, not as ecclesiastical
disciplinarian, but as practical philanthropist. Burleigh appears but
seldom in the discussions but he too sat on the committee in the House
of Lords in 1597.

The most important part of the work seems to have been done by the
committee appointed by the Commons on November 19th. The law for the
relief of the poor was a new Bill framed by the committee after many
other Bills had been considered and seems to have been accepted at once
by the House. This committee was an enormous committee and the number
of bills considered by it was altogether exceptional, and it is to
the meetings of its members in the Middle Temple Hall that we owe the
making of a workable Poor Law and all its lasting effects on English
social life.

[Sidenote: Conclusions.]

Even by looking at the provisions of the statutes, we can see that
opinion on the subject had greatly changed since 1569. During the
earlier years of the period Parliament tried to exterminate beggary by
increasing the severity of the punishment of beggars. If we except the
law of 1547, this policy culminates in the statute of 1572, though,
even in 1572, increased provision for the impotent poor accompanied
increased severity towards able-bodied vagrants. The Act of 1576
indicates the beginning of a great change of thought and policy.
Legislators have given up the idea that the existence of masterless men
is entirely owing to the idleness and wickedness of the men themselves;
they provide materials for employment and Houses of Correction and so
recognise that the evil was partly caused by a want of training and by
a want of work. In 1597 there was a further change; the most severe
punishments against vagrants had been repealed and the most important
part of the legislation of this year was the statute for the relief of
the poor.

[Sidenote: 5. The chief characteristics of the action of the Privy
Council.]

We now turn to the second factor in the growth of the English system
of Poor Relief; the pressure exercised by the Privy Council on the
justices of the peace. The methods employed were twofold; sometimes
general measures were enforced through the whole country or through
large districts of the country, sometimes pressure was brought to bear
only on particular local officials.

The general measures adopted between 1569 and 1597 consist chiefly of
organised searches made for the discovery and punishment of rogues and
special precautions undertaken in order to prevent sudden alterations
in the price of corn. It is not until 1597 and afterwards that these
general measures concern the relief of the poor in ordinary times.

[Sidenote: 6. The whipping campaign.]

In 1569 there were disturbances in many parts of the country and a
serious rebellion in the North. The vagabonds of the neighbourhood
increased the disorder and the vagrants of the time were often rebels.
It was probably therefore quite as much for political as for social
reasons that the Privy Council undertook a whipping campaign against
vagrants between 1569 and 1572. In consequence of the orders of the
Council reports were sent both from the Council of the North and from
many justices of the Southern and Midland Counties. The reports from
the North indicate clearly that these measures for the repression of
vagrants and the relief of the poor were closely connected with the
maintenance of order. In May 1569 the President of the Council of
the North writes thus to the Queen from York: "We conferred with the
justices of the peace in the county for its good order, and finding
great quiet and content by the good execution of the statute for
vagabonds, we have taken order that once in every month there shall be
a secret search for that purpose throughout the shire, and certificates
sent to us until next November[156]." Almost immediately afterwards
the rebellion in the North broke out and was suppressed. In December
1572 Henry, Earl of Huntingdon, writes to Lord Burghley from York and
sends a copy of letters and articles sent to the justices of the peace
of every riding and all the towns named in his commission[157]. One
of these articles shows that the valiant rogues were often more than
beggars. "To stay the spreading of false and seditious rumours and the
sending of messages from the late rebels to trouble the quiet of the
realm, order is to be given in market towns and other places that all
suspected passengers, vagabonds, beggars, and rogues be punished with
severity and celerity, according to the late statute." But even here
measures for relieving the necessitous accompany those for repressing
vagrants, and the justices were ordered to send monthly accounts of the
proceedings taken by them to provide for the poor and impotent.

[156] _Cal. of State Papers_, Addenda, May 26, 1569. President and
Council of the North to the Queen.

[157] _Ib._, Dec. 28, 1572. Henry, Earl of Huntingdon, to Lord Burghley.

In the reports from the North the political motives of the Government
are obvious, but the character of the organisation is shown better in
the replies sent by the justices of the Southern and Midland counties.

[Sidenote: 7. Nature of general measures.]

To enforce these measures orders were decided upon by the Council and
then sent with letters directing their enforcement to the sheriffs and
justices of the peace of every county. These justices reported to the
Council the methods adopted by them to carry out these orders and the
condition of affairs within their jurisdictions.

Many of the reports are still to be found among the State Papers and
afford us considerable information as to the state of the country
and the extent to which the law was executed. The justices' reports
concerning vagrants from 1569 to 1571 are preserved from nineteen
different counties. These were made directly to the Privy Council. From
some counties like Gloucester and Northampton there are many reports,
but from others like Lincoln and Hereford only one was returned.
Although the justices of Holland in Lincolnshire only report once they
say they will keep watches every month in order that vagabonds may be
punished and suppressed[158].

[158] _Dom. State Papers, Queen Elizabeth_, Vol. 86, No. 12.

The accounts from different parts of the country vary very much.
The Oxfordshire answer is usually "All things be well[159]," but in
Northamptonshire there were many vagrants, and apparently they were
mostly sturdy rogues for they were usually "stocked" and whipped[160].
Gloucestershire is a fairly average county; in the country round
Cirencester we are told there were no "persons disorderly found," but
in the division of Thornbury there were ninety-two vagrant men and
fifteen children. In Tewkesbury and Deerhurst there were fifteen sturdy
vagrants, twenty impotent beggars, and four children[161].

[159] _Ib._, Vol. 81, 42. Hundred of Dorchester.

[160] _Ib._, Vol. 81, Nos. 14 and 44. Other reports from Northampton
show that many rogues were found and severely punished, Vol. 81, Nos.
45 and 46, Vol. 86, 22. That from Bullington however is an exception,
for there a watch was kept, but no vagrants were taken, Vol. 81, 16.

[161] Cirencester, Vol. 80, No. 42. The report for Thornbury and five
other hundreds is for the searches made on Aug. 20th and Aug. 21st,
1571. The division contained six hundreds, and was nearly a quarter
of the shire, Vol. 80, No. 33. Tewkesbury and Deerhurst, Vol. 80,
No. 59. At Normancross in Huntingdon eleven vagrants were found on
September 13th, of whom three were pedlars, one was a "tynker," and two
"minstrells," Vol. 83, 36. III.

Sometimes great numbers were attracted by particular causes. Thus from
Cambridgeshire some reports state, "No such kynde of persons there
were found[162]," but in four hundreds forty-seven were arrested,
"the number whereof were so greate at that present by reason of the
confluence to and from Sturbridge fayer[163]."

[162] In the hundreds of Cheveley, Staine, Staplowe and Flendish and in
the Isle of Ely there were no vagrants found in the two watches kept on
Aug. 20th and Sept. 12th, Vol. 83, No. 36.

[163] In the hundreds of Wetherley, Thrylow, Armyngford and Stowe. At
Chesterton, Papworth and North Stowe, also in Cambridgeshire, eleven
vagrants were found and punished on the three days August 20th, Sept.
12th, and Oct. 12th, 1571, Vol. 83, No. 36.

When we remember that all the vagrants were taken in two or three
searches only and that it is probable that the more capable had ample
notice, the results indicate a considerable amount of disorder. On the
other hand, the fact that when the proportions are given so many are
impotent, and the frequent presence of children lead us to believe that
these wanderers were more often people in want than wicked plunderers
of their fellow-countrymen.

These orders of the Privy Council were directed towards the decrease
of vagrants, but in the replies of the justices we see the close
connection between measures of this kind and the relief of the poor.
Thus in Essex and Surrey advantage was sometimes taken of the clause
permitting the justices to put vagrants to service. At Barking and
Walthamstow masterless men were appointed to masters, and at Brixton
and Wallingford three out of thirteen were put to service[164]. But
the report from Worcestershire is more interesting and confirms the
information derived from the speech made by Mr Sands during the debate
in Parliament on the Bill of 1571[165]. The justices there said that
they had already taken measures to repress beggars and so found very
few in the searches now made; the few that remained there were licensed
by them but the "greter parte of the poore ar provyded for where they
dwell[166]." We can thus see that, though this whipping campaign
concerns vagrants, the question of vagrants was inseparably connected
with the care of the poor, and that these measures, although undertaken
with a view of preserving order, tended to lead to the better
organisation of relief.

[164] Barking and Walthamstow, Vol. 80, No. 26. Brixton, Vol. 80, 44. V.

[165] See above.

[166] Vol. 80, No. 55.

The next series of measures undertaken by the Privy Council concerns
therefore the supply of the markets during years of high-priced corn.

Even in the reign of Henry VIII. London and Bristol had bought a public
store of corn in order to prevent scarcity, and in 1528 and 1549 the
Privy Council had regulated the buying and selling of grain in order
to lower the price but had failed to obtain much result[167]. Between
1569 and 1597 there were three seasons in which corn was exceptionally
scarce, 1572, 1586, and 1594 to 1597. In each of these the Privy
Council issued similar orders and their action became more vigorous and
more successful as time went on.

[167] See p. 51.

The sudden rises in the price of corn were in a great measure caused by
the narrowness of the area from which a supply could come. There were
few means of rapid communication; the roads were bad and the supplies
of grain available for a particular district might be in the hands of
very few men. It was quite possible for the dealers of corn to prevent
corn from coming to a market, to buy up the supplies already there and
afterwards raise the price to an artificial height. This was considered
unfair according to the commercial morality of the time, and when it
was done in the case of a necessary of life it caused great hardship to
the poor.

In 1572 enquiries were made as to the price of corn in the Western
counties and in Norfolk and Suffolk. The replies received show that it
varied considerably even in adjacent counties. In Somerset best wheat
sold for twenty shillings a quarter, in Dorset it fetched sixteen,
it cost eighteen shillings in Norfolk, while in Suffolk it would be
purchased for only fourteen[168]. The next year a commission was issued
and the commissioners were empowered to order the farmers to bring
corn to market in proportion to the amount they possessed[169].

[168] _Dom. State Papers, Queen Elizabeth._

Norfolk and Suffolk, July 31st, 1572, Vol. 89, 1.

    Norfolk.              Suffolk.
  Wheat 18_s._          Wheat 14_s._
  Rye 13_s._ 4_d._      Rye 12_s._
  Barley 7_s._ 4_d._    Malt 8_s._ 8_d._

Western Counties, Vol. 88, No. 52.

                  Dorset.         Somerset.      Devon.       Cornwall.
  Best wheat 16_s._   a quarter    20_s._        26_s._ 8_d._   48_s._
  Seconds    13_s._ 4_d._  "       17_s._ 4_d._  24_s._         44_s._
  Rye        10_s._        "       16_s._        21_s._ 4_d._   32_s._
  Barley      6_s._        "       8_s._ 8_d._   16_s._         26_s._ 8_d._

  Abundant--able to export.     Sent to Devon,
                                  but no more
                                  to spare.

It is difficult to compare the prices in Devon and Cornwall with the
rest of the counties because the size of the bushel varied in Cornwall
and was often twice as great as that used elsewhere; in Devon also the
Winchester measures were not always used.

[169] The commission is dated Oct. 21, 1573: it attributes the high
prices to the greediness of corn-dealers who secretly export abroad,
and it empowers commissioners to order farmers to bring to market such
portions of grain as they prescribe, and to sell the same at reasonable
prices. They were also to advertise the Council of their difficulties,
to the intent the Council might assist them. _D. S. P._ Vol. 92,
No. 41. The rough draft of the Commission is amended in Cecil's
handwriting. _D. S. P._ Vol. 92, No. 40.

So far the measures adopted closely resembled those of 1527-8, but in
1586 the organisation had become more developed.

In April and May the Council issued letters to the justices of the
maritime districts and to twenty-three other counties ordering them
to see the markets supplied with corn and to prevent the abuses of
corn-dealers[170]. Notwithstanding there were symptoms of discontent.
The workmen in the west of England were suffering not only because the
price of corn was high but because there was a lack of employment in
the cloth trade. At Romsey certain rioters "pretend that the present
dearthe of corn and want of work hathe mooved them to attempt that
outrage." In Framloyde, Gloucestershire, there was "a mutinee by
the common people, who rifled a bark laden with malt." The justices
responsible for Romsey were told to have regard to "their Lordships'
late letters for the serving of the markettes and to deale with the
principall clothemen and traders theraboutes for the setting of the
people on worke[171]." Letters of the same kind were also sent to
Gloucestershire[172] and Somerset. In the latter we are told that the
spinners, carders and workers of wool lack "their comon and necessarie
foode, a matter not onlie full of pittie in respect of the people
but of dangerous consequence to the state." Her Majesty, therefore,
"tendring the one and careful of th' other" directs the justices to
call the clothiers before them and "require and command such of them
as have stockes and are of habillitie to employ the same as they have
heretofore don so as by them the poore maie be set on worke[173]."

[170] On April 29th, 1586, these letters were sent to the maritime
counties. On May 7th to eight of the home counties, and on May 22nd to
seventeen other counties and to Wales. _Privy Council Register_, Vol.
XIV. pp. 79, 98 and 119.

[171] _Ib._, p. 91, 6th May, 1586.

[172] See below.

[173] _Privy Council Register_, Vol. XIV. p. 93, 6 May, 1586. The
difficulty in the cloth trade was connected with the concessions
granted to the Merchant Adventurers. Their privileges forced the
English manufacturer to sell cloth to them only. When there was
a slackness in trade these concessions were always questioned or
annulled. In December, 1586, the Company say they will raise a stock
and buy more cloths than they can at present sell so that the workfolk
of Somerset and Wilts can be employed. If this fails they consent
that the trade shall be thrown open. This was apparently afterwards
done, but difficulties were still thrown in the way of the "Merchant
strangers." _Privy Council Register_, p. 237, Sept. 1587. The Earl of
Leicester wrote both to Walsingham and Burleigh on the subject. In
his letter to Walsingham he says the towns of the West, Bristol and
Hampton, are falling into decay, and there is an "exstraeme cry and
compleynt of y^e poore for lack of work such as have bin sett on work
heretofore by clothiers." The cause, the clothiers say, is because
they "can not have reasonable price nor utterance for their cloth in
London." He says that "sondry of the most hablest ... are worthie great
favo^r and thanks for they to ther great loss kepe more now on than
ever they did for the poor's sake." _Dom. State Papers, Queen Eliz._,
Vol. 200, Nos. 5 and 10.

With regard to the scarcity of corn the Council also took further
action. Burleigh carefully considered and amended a proclamation for
dealing with the difficulty[174]. The three judges, Popham, Mildmay
and Manwood, to whom the matter was referred for consideration, made
a series of recommendations[175]." These were embodied in a set of
orders, the draft of which is amended in Burleigh's own hand[176].
After being signed by the Council[177] these orders were issued early
in 1587 to the justices throughout the country[178]. They probably
formed the nucleus of the Scarcity Book of Orders of the earlier
Stuarts which in turn was the forerunner of the Orders and Directions
of January 1630/1.

[174] Lansdowne MSS., Nos. 48, 51.

[175] _Ib._, Vol. 48, No. 52.

[176] _Ib._ See Appendix.

[177] The Council appear to have held a meeting on the last day of the
year 1586 expressly to sign these orders. _Cal. of State Papers_, Dec.
31st, 1586.

[178] _Privy Council Register_, Vol. XIV. p. 277. On Jan. 2nd, 1586/7,
letters were sent to the "Lordes Archbishopes of Canterbury and Yorke
signifyinge her Majesties care for the releefe of the poore in this
tyme of derthe and scarsety for redresse wherof certen orders, by her
specyall commandement, are devysed by theyr Lordships; for furtherance
of which purpose theyr Lordships are prayed to geve order to the
Bishopes and Ordynaryes under theyr Dioces to instruct the curates,
ministers or preachers of the Word to exhorte the (people is here
struck out) of habylytye to extend charitye to the poore and them to
beare this visytation of God with patyence &c." Letters to the same
effect were written to the Lord Presydent of the Northe and the Lo.
Pres. of Wales, also "to all the sheeres of the Realme dyrected to the
Shryves and Justyces of the Peace."

These directions of 1587 commanded the appointment of juries who
were to make an elaborate survey of the amount of corn possessed by
everyone, and to state the number of people belonging to the different
households. The justices were then to allow each owner to retain as
much corn as was necessary for the food of his househood and for seed,
but were to order the rest to be brought to market. They were moreover
to use "all good meanes and perswasions ... that the pore may be served
of corne at convyent and charitable prices." They were also to see to
the execution of the laws for the relief of the poor, "that the maymed
or hurt soldiers and all other impotent persons be carefullye seene
unto to be relieved," and "that the justices doe their best to have
convenient stocke to be provided in everye division or other place
accordinge to the statut for settinge the pore a worke[179]."

[179] Lansdowne MSS., Vol. 48, No. 54. Printed in the Appendix.

Many reports from the justices were sent to the Council in answer both
to their letters and to the more elaborate set of orders of 1587. The
justices divided themselves so that some were responsible for each
division of the county[180]. They were present on market-days and saw
if there were a sufficient supply of corn, and tried to persuade the
owners to sell it at a moderate price[181]. They also took measures to
check the dealers in corn or badgers. A difference of opinion seems
to have existed as to the usefulness of these dealers. The Privy
Council thought them mischievous, but the justices of Gloucester find
them "honestlie demeaning themselves to be profytable members of this
our Commonwelth[182]." The justices often, as in Norfolk[183], made
detailed enquiries as to the amount of corn held by each farmer and the
number of his household, and in accordance with the information thus
acquired they ordered, as in Wootton, Oxfordshire, every corn holder
to bring a proportionate quantity of his grain to market[184]. In
Gloucestershire they went farther and also fixed the price at which it
was to be sold[185].

[180] Lincolnshire. The justices have divided themselves and sent a
list of those allotted to the different divisions. _Dom. State Papers,
Queen Elizabeth_, Vol. 189, No. 35. From Surrey the names of the
justices allotted to the different markets are enclosed. _Ib._, Vol.
189, No. 37. The names of the justices for the several divisions of
Huntingdonshire are enclosed, with a report signed by the Bishop of
Lincoln and a Henry and an Oliver Cromwell, &c.

[181] Berkshire. The justices attend the markets and "see the selling
of each kind of graine there at such prices as shall seme most
fittest." _D. S. P._, Vol. 189, 49.

Warwickshire. The justices of Hemlingford have attended the markets
"aswell to see the poore people provided necessarie corne as also to
use o^r best endeavours to ease them in the prices therof as much as we
could." _Ib._, Vol. 198, No. 77. III.

[182] _D. S. P._, Vol. 189, 50. The justices have licensed a certain
number.

[183] Detailed reports were sent from Gyltcross, Shropham, South
Greenhoe, Wayland and Grimshawe. Vol. 191, 12. See Appendix. Most of
the replies sent in 1587 report the appointment of juries to search the
barns for corn. _Dom. State Papers, Queen Eliz._, Vol. 199, 43. I. II.;
Vol. 200, 16. The justices responsible for the nine hundreds of Caistor
Sessions say that in their division there were 13,536 "handicraftesmen
and poore people that have no corn."

[184] Vol. 198, No. 42. Considerably over a hundred farmers are ordered
to bring definite quantities of each kind of grain to particular
markets, generally either that of Woodstock or that of Oxford.

Vol. 199, No. 43. The farmers of Buckinghamshire have been bound to
bring their corn "by porcions weeklye to such marketts as we thinke
most fittest."

In Lancaster order has been taken that those who have to sell "shall
bring and sell the same in open markette or otherwise to their poore
neighbours." Vol. 200, No. 54. IV. In the hundreds of Caistor Sessions
also the poor people might buy away from the markets and the farmers
might deduct any grain sold to them from the quantity they were to
bring to market. Vol. 198, No. 21.

[185] The justices of Gloucestershire say that in their several
allotments they have "visited the marketts, seen the poore relieved
as we may, searched the barnes, storehouses and grenyers of farmers
and others hable to furnishe the marketts with corne, and having
consideration to theyr private families have in discretion appointed
them a certeyne quantytie of certen kindes of graine to be by them
brought weekelie to the markett accordinglie, and of such our
appointments have kepte books in writinge and doe finde therapon, that
as yet the said farmers and others doe fullfill our appointments in
this behalfe without any disobedyence. And further according to the
said your lettres we have sett downe several prices upon everie kinde
of graine within the severall divisions of this Shire, as in respecte
of the distaunce of the places and the present tyme of necessytie we
have thought most convenyent, after which rate we will herafter in our
several limitts have care to see the same solde as may be beste for the
relief of our poore neighbours." _Dom. State Papers, Queen Eliz._, Vol.
189, 50.

The Privy Council certainly trusted much to the justices, and both
farmers and markets were thoroughly regulated. One cannot wonder that
sometimes the corn owners were disobedient[186], though on the whole
the orders seem to have been loyally carried out. Even in our own
time the poor of Italy and Spain have suffered much from an attempted
"corner" in grain in spite of our rapid means of communication and
worldwide source of supply. The circumstances of 1587 must have made
organisation necessary, for the orders were successful, and when
reissued in 1594 it was especially noted that in 1587 they had done
"much good for the stay of y^e dearthe and for y^e relieving of y^e
poore[187]."

[186] A letter was written from the Council to the justices of Notts
stating that the greate quantitie of corne of one Freston "should be
employed for relieving the necessitie of the shire." If he refuse
to follow their directions they are to take the corn and cause a
"quantitie to be solde at reasonable prices in the markettes adjoyning
for the reliefe of the poore people."

[187] Egerton MSS. 2644, f. 55.

Already in 1586 additional measures were occasionally taken for the
relief of the labourers and handicraftsmen. In Norfolk, "the poorer
sorte are by persuasion sarved at meaner pryces[188]"; while in the
county of Nottingham a philanthropic Duke of Rutland adopted the
following expedient, afterwards employed by public authority. When
it was known that there was likely to be a scarcity of grain, the
Duke caused his corn to be sold in small quantities to the poor two
shillings and eight pence under the market price. The justices tell
us that by these means "the greedines of a number was frustrated, the
poore releved, and the expectancy of excessive dearthe stayed[189]."

[188] Vol. 191, No. 12. See Appendix. In Bedfordshire the justices
for the hundreds of Manshed, Flett and Redbornestoke state that "the
farmers do sell to the poore labourers barley for xx^d y^e bushell and
ii^s the most," and that have so "promysed to do untill August next."
The ordinary price of barley as reported in the same document was 2_s._
8_d._ the bushel. Vol. 200, No. 10. I.

[189] Vol. 190, 14.

But, although the orders issued in 1587 especially command the
provision as well of adequate support for the impotent as of work for
the able-bodied, very few of the replies report any special action with
reference to these matters. There are however one or two exceptions.
Thus Arthur Hopton, a justice responsible for the hundred of Blithing,
states that 500 poor in adjacent towns were relieved with "bred and
other victuall," and that this should be continued for twenty-three
weeks[190]. Certain justices of Hemlingford also give an especial
charge to the collectors to see that all "the poore aged and impotent
persons w^tin everie township and hamlet be sufficientlie releeved as
they ought to be," and to "adde a weekelie supplie to the same former
reliefe," if the relief they had previously ordered were "too slender
for them by reason of the dearth." The justices also especially charge
the overseers[191] to see "that all the poore and idle persons in
everie towneship and hamlet w^{ch} are able to labour and want worke be
daylie set on worke ... towards the getting of their living according
also to the former orders made to that effect[192]." But generally the
action taken by the justices both in 1586 and 1587 mainly concerns the
supply of corn. Still the whole organisation was made chiefly in the
interests of the poor, and both the reports and the orders themselves
notice this fact[193].

[190] Vol. 198, 74.

[191] The appointment of overseers or collectors for the poor was first
ordered by the statute of 1572. In Hemlingford they seem to have been
two distinct offices.

[192] Vol. 198, No. 77. IV.

[193] In the orders themselves the justices are ordered to "use all
other good meanes that ar not menconed in these orders that the
marketts be well served and the pore releyved ... duringe this time of
dearth." The letters sent with them stated that the orders were devised
because of "Her Majestie's care for the releefe of the poore in this
tyme of derthe." See note above. Many reports show that the orders were
intended to help the poor. One from Kington, Warwickshire, is signed
by the Sir Thomas Lucy of Shakespearian fame and by Richard Verney.
The report is said to be sent "in the execution of the orders sett
downe by the lords of her mat^s moste honorable privie councell for the
desposinge of corne and graine in reliefe of the poore and furnishinge
the marketts." _Ib._, Vol. 198, 77. I. See also Beds. justices report
orders taken "for the staie of the dearthe of graine and the reliefe of
the poore therof." _D. S. P._ Vol. 200, No. 10.

In Buckinghamshire overseers were appointed "to see in our absence all
things dulye performed as well for the reliefe of the poorer sort as
otherwise." Vol. 199, I. II. IV. V., &c.

In 1597, as well as in 1586, the Privy Council endeavoured to supply
the poor with corn at reasonable rates, but it will be more convenient
to consider that attempt with the rest of the events of those years of
scarcity from 1594 to 1597[194].

[194] See Chapter VII.

As a rule in the reign of Elizabeth the object of these scarcity
measures was not so much to sell to the poor under price, as to arrange
by organisation that the supply of corn should be equally distributed
over the whole year, and that consequently the price of corn should
be more even for everybody. It was rather to prevent monopoly than
to organise doles. It was undertaken chiefly in the interests of the
poor because a lack in the supply of corn affected them most; it did
not only mean hardship, it meant starvation. It was undertaken by the
Privy Council partly with the desire of repressing disorder, because
insurrections and scarcity usually occurred together, and it was the
object of the Government to keep the people in their "obedience[195]."
But already the changed feeling of Parliament is found also in the
Privy Council: measures of organised relief were seen to be the most
effectual method of repression, and the closer study of the subject
resulted in greater care for the poor.

[195] In Devonshire the justices say there is not so much corn as they
could wish, but they think there will be "no greate inconvenience or
disorder." Vol. 189, 51. In Bedfordshire the report states no "manner
of person poore or riche founde anye falte for wante," nor did they
"move or attempte anye manner of disorder or strive for the same or
for any other cause, but were and remayne in verie good and dutyfull
obedience, god be thanked." Vol. 191, 6.

These general measures for the repression of vagrants and the supply
of corn are not only important to our subject because they directly
concern the relief of the poor; they are even more important on
account of their indirect connection therewith. In the first place
these measures brought the authorities both of the nation and of the
country into contact with the poor, and they were thus led to devise
more extensive measures for bettering the condition of their needy
neighbours; it became more and more a habit with them to regard matters
concerning the poor as a department of Government.

In the second place, by means of these measures dealing with corn and
vagrants the organisation was prepared which was afterwards used for
the administration of the relief of the poor. The letters of the
Privy Council to the justices, the allotment of the justices to their
different divisions, the supervision of the judges, and the reports to
the Privy Council were all utilised by the system established under
Charles I.

If this later system had been administered by a body of officials
untrained in the same kind of work, and unused to these methods
of administration, it would have had little chance of being well
administered. Such degree of success as was attained must have been at
least partially due to the fact that the measures for the punishment
of vagabonds and for the provision of grain preceded the more detailed
orders for the relief of the poor. The new orders were thus executed
by county and municipal officials trained to similar duties and used
to like methods of administration, and it was in this way that the
Elizabethan measures of scarcity have an important influence on the
growth of the English administration of the Poor Law.

[Sidenote: 8. The influence of the Privy Council upon the Corporation
of London.]

But sometimes the measures of the Privy Council were not general:
pressure was placed only on particular local officials. We will first
examine a few cases of this kind concerning the City of London. We have
already seen that in 1569 there were two sharp letters of the Privy
Council to the Lord Mayor censuring him for his neglect in matters
concerning the vagrants and poor[196]. In 1573 the Lord Mayor refers
again to the displeasure of the Council and had apparently received a
similar letter[197]. In this way therefore the Privy Council censured
neglect and commanded local officials to remedy the abuses of their
administration.

[196] See Chapter IV.

[197] _Journals_, Vol. XX. 1 f. 42, March 14, 1572/3.

Sometimes we see the authorities of London asking the advice of the
Council with regard to the measures that they have themselves prepared.
Orders for the poor were drawn up in 1579 and again in 1594, and in
both cases the Lords of the Privy Council were consulted[198]. The
Lords of the Council also call attention to particular difficulties.
In 1583 they recommend special measures to prevent the increase of
Irish beggars[199], and they repeatedly write to order increased
vigilance in enforcing the regulations against small houses and
tenements which have been newly erected[200]. Special matters are
sometimes arranged by them; in 1594 the City rulers are told to meet
the justices of Middlesex in order that they may take joint action
to repress vagrants[201]. Even details come under the notice of the
members of the Privy Council, and in 1596 they directed the Lord Mayor
to see that the corn in a particular ship was sold to the poor and not
bought up by dealers[202].

[198] _Journals_, 14 May, 1579, XX. No. 2, f. 483. "This daye the
residue of the Booke devised for the settinge of the poore on worke in
Bridewell was redd to the Comon Counsell." ... It was agreed "that it
shabe, as it is preferred to the consideracon of the lordes of your
ma^{tys} pryvie Counsell by the whole concent of this Court of Comon
Counsell and that Sir Rowlande Haywarde, Sir James Hawes, Mr Alderman
Woodcross, etc. shall travell in preferringe the same booke to the
lordes of the Counsell." 17 Nov. 1594, _Remembrancia_, II. 74.

[199] _Journals_, 21 f. 329 _b_, 28 Dec. 1583.

[200] _Remembrancia_, I. 495, 496, 514; II. 17.

[201] _Ib._, II. 75.

[202] _Ib._, II. 59.

The Council thus was apparently very well informed as to the condition
of affairs and had power to interfere with effect even in matters of
detail whenever the rulers of London were inclined to be slothful.

[Sidenote: 9. The pressure exercised by the Privy Council on other
local authorities.]

We have not the same detailed information with regard to other towns,
but we can see that this kind of action on the part of the Lords of the
Council was by no means confined to London. We find them writing to
Burghley himself and insisting on the appointment of Provost Marshals
in Hertfordshire and Essex who were to take especial care to repress
vagrants and idle persons[203]; they rebuke the Devonshire justices for
not providing properly for old soldiers and sailors[204]. They write
to Cambridge and order that care be taken to prevent the increase in
the number of tenements in the town[205], and they especially commend
the Norfolk justices for erecting a "fourme for the punishment of
loyterers, stubborne servantes, and the settinge of vagabondes, roages
and other idle people to work, after the manner of Bridewell[206]".

[203] _Cal. of State Papers_, March 17, 1590.

[204] _Quarter Sessions under Queen Eliz._, A. Hamilton, p. 19.

[205] The Privy Council write that they "are given to understand that
divers of the inhabitants of the Town of Cambridge seeking their
own private gain with the public hurt and incommodity of the whole
University and Town have heretofore accustomed to build and erect
houses upon sundry spare grounds in and about the said Town; but of
late and at this present especially they do not only increase and
continue the same but do more usually divide one house into many
small tenements and those for the most part do let and hire out to
the meanest and poorest persons, which tenements ... are a means ...
as we are informed whereby the University and Town are overburthened
in yearly allowance towards the maintenance of the poor." The Mayor
and Vice-chancellor therefore with the assistance of the "best and
discretest persons and officers of the University and Town" are to
cause inquiry to be made as to how many tenements there are and as to
how many people inhabit them, and are also to find out if the tenements
had been built or divided within ten years. They were then to take
measures to alter as many tenements and to remove as many of the
inmates as they should deem expedient. The letter is dated June 8th,
1584, and is signed by Burghley, Walsingham, and several other members
of the Privy Council. Cooper, _Annals of Cambridge_, Vol. II. p. 398.

[206] _Cal. of State Papers_, Vol. 133, No. 56.

There is enough to show that the Privy Council was often active and
that its interference had a considerable effect, but that before 1597
this interference was only occasionally exercised.

This pressure exerted by the Privy Council on justices and municipal
authorities becomes the most important factor in the development of
the English system of poor relief in the next century. Law was not yet
enforced merely because it had been enacted, and in regard to the poor
no force of continued habit as yet made public opinion compel negligent
officials to do their duty. So far men objected to pay rates; they were
not firmly convinced of the duty of the state to relieve the poor.

The pressure of the Privy Council was therefore necessary to enforce
the law. But the habit of interference in these matters and the
organisation that alone could make interference have much effect grew
very slowly. Before 1597 we can see this habit of interference and
this organisation growing, but as yet it is only utilised occasionally
and to meet some special emergency; it is not part of a general system
which almost everywhere commanded obedience.




CHAPTER VII.

1569-1597.

LOCAL ORGANISATION OF POOR RELIEF AND THE EVENTS OF THE YEARS 1594-1597.

  1. The organisation of London with regard to the poor.
  2. The organisation of Norwich.
  3. The action of other towns,
    (1) Concerning the settlement of new-comers.
    (2) Concerning the unemployed.
    (3) Concerning the raising of funds.
  4. The events of the years of scarcity 1594-1597.
  5. Summary of the period 1569-1597.


Improvement in the organisation for the relief of the poor during
the period from 1569 to 1597 is found in the local as well as in the
central government. We will now look at the local side of the question.
It is possible to obtain a fair idea of the kind of action adopted by
the rulers of shire and borough by examining first the measures of
London and Norwich in detail, and secondly some examples of the methods
of other towns and counties.

[Sidenote: 1. The organisation of London with regard to the poor.]

We have considered the action of the Privy Council with regard to
questions affecting the poor in London, but we have not as yet looked
at the measures themselves.

Some of these were designed to carry into effect the Act of 1572 which
we have seen was the first law that gave statutory authority for
compulsory assessment for the relief of the poor. In Sept. 1572 the
Mayor issued a precept to the aldermen which commanded each in his ward
to see that the constables and other "sad and discrete personnes[207]"
made certain inquiries about the poor of every parish. They were to
find out the names and surnames "of suche aged, decayed and impotent
poore people" as "of necessitie be compelled to lyve by almes," and
were to ascertain who had been born in the parish or had lived there
three years before the beginning of the last Parliament.

[207] _Journals of the Common Council of London_, Vol. XX. No. 1, f.
15b.

The Lord Mayor in issuing this precept relied on the municipal and
not on the parochial authorities. It was apparently unsuccessful, for
later commands were sent to the aldermen on Sept. 5th ordering them
to make these same inquiries through the churchwardens[208]. Three
days later more detailed instructions were given to the same effect.
The churchwardens and other responsible men in every parish were "to
examyne which poore are to be releved in everye of the said parishes
and to be provided for according to the last statute made for that
purpose." The aldermen were to set down the names of the poor and
how long they had dwelt in the City and how much each of them ought
to receive "that they nede not begg." They were then to make an
assessment of "everye Inhabitant that nowe payeth nothinge" to help
his needy neighbours and, if there was any cause to increase the sum
paid by any rich man, they were to note what increased amount they
thought necessary[209]. Thus the old voluntary payments seem to become
the basis of the first assessment under the new statute, while a few
wealthy and stingy givers were coerced.

[208] _Journals of the Common Council of London_, Vol. XX. No. 1, f. 24.

[209] _Ib._ f. 25.

Unfortunately the fund thus raised was not sufficient and efforts
were made to reduce the expenditure and to collect the whole of the
amount assessed. The aldermen were to summon the governors of the
hospitals and were to interview the poor people themselves as well as
the churchwardens. They had then the unpleasant task of lowering the
pensions already granted because "the colleccon all readie appoynted
will not serve to advance suche ample pencons." They had also carefully
to see that no one received anything who was not born in the parish
or an inhabitant for the full time appointed by the statute[210]. By
these means it was hoped that it would not be necessary to spend
more than the sum raised by this semi-voluntary poor-rate. In March,
1573, the contributions for the next year became due while some of the
contributions for the previous year were still in arrear; the Lord
Mayor found it necessary to complain of the negligent execution of the
statute for the poor "by reason whearof this Cittie before this tyme
bearinge the name of a Lanterne to all other the Quene's maiestie's
domynions in example of good order and due execucon of good Laws is
accompted to some farre behynde other places in the due execucon of
this statute to the greate greffe of well willers to the same[211]."
Henceforward every part of the precept concerning the poor was to be
"dulye and carefullie put in execucon."

[210] _Ib._ f. 32 b.

[211] _Journals_, f. 42.

By next year it was evident that even if the assessments were properly
paid the funds would be insufficient. The Mayor therefore fell back
on the old plan of collections in the churches after the Sunday
sermons[212]. An ancient custom of the City was also utilised. The
Companies in state attended by turns the sermons in Easter week at St
Mary's Spittal. Special collections were then to be made for the poor
and the money given to the Mayor that it might be distributed where
there was most need "by the handes of good and godly citizens[213]."

[212] _Ib._ Vol. XX., No. 1, f. 119.

[213] _Ib._ f. 122 b, 8th April, 1574.

In these precepts of 1572, 1573, and 1574 the City rulers employ
voluntary methods and avoid compulsory poor-rates as far as possible.
It is however evident that the voluntary subscriptions were inadequate.
The municipal basis of the organisation is strongly marked; the sums
collected under the assessments were to be paid to the governors of
Christ's Hospital and the chief part of the money seems to have been
expended by the City and not by the parochial officials[214].

[214] There is a statement of the accounts of St John's, Walbrook,
between Sept. 10th, 1572 and Sept. 11th, 1573. From this we learn that
the collectors received £16. 17_s._ 5_d._, and that £1. 6_s._ 8_d._ was
lacking of the assessed sum. £5. 3_s._ 4_d._ had been paid to the poor
of the parish, £9. 15_s._ 9_d._ to the Treasurer of Christ's Hospital,
while the collectors owed the remaining 18_s._ 4_d._ _Cal. of State
Papers_, Addenda, Sept. 11th, 1573. So far as this parish is concerned
therefore the amount paid to the central authorities was much greater
than that distributed in local pensions.

The City rulers also attempted to deal with the poor all over London
by an organisation founded upon a series of orders or articles for the
poor. In 1576 a set of regulations was issued dealing with the duties
of "the parish," of the "constables" and of "surveyors" with regard
to vagrants. The parishioners were to choose a surveyor every Sunday
who was to attend every night for a week and help the constable in the
search for sturdy beggars. Every fortnight at least the constable,
beadle and churchwardens were to visit the houses of all the poor
people in their districts and were to order any of the new arrivals who
were unable to support themselves without burdening the parish to be
sent away[215]. These commands only concerned vagrants and new comers
and are of far less importance than the regulations of 1579.

[215] _Journals_, Vol. XX., No. 2, f. 323.

In that year orders were issued which if carried out would have
provided methods for dealing with all classes of the poor and, but for
the Elizabethan phrases and Elizabethan whippings, we should be much
more inclined to think that they were passed by a London County Council
in 1899, than by the Corporation of the City in 1579. In August of that
year the Common Council resolved that "an Acte for the poore" should be
drawn up and considered, and a few days later the book was read to the
Council and "established as a lawe[216]."

[216] _Ib._ f. 498, 499 b, Aug. 4th, 1579. These orders have been
printed, and are often dated 1587. But they were first established in
1579 under the title of "Orders appointed to be executed in the Cittie
of London for setting roges and idle persons to worke and for releefe
of the poor."

There is a double basis for the administration of these regulations:
the vagrants were dealt with by the municipal system working through
the hospitals; the impotent by the parochial officials. Children
and the able-bodied poor came under the jurisdiction of both. The
vagrants were to be brought to Bridewell and there divided into three
classes. Those who were not diseased and did not belong to the City
were to be "dealt with according to the lawe," that is, they were to
be whipped and sent to their settlement. Those who were ill were to
go to St Thomas's or St Bartholomew's and when cured to return to
Bridewell and be treated in the same manner. But the "sturdy beggars"
whom "the Cittie by law is charged to provide for" were to be received
into Bridewell: they were to be "there kept with thin diet onely
sufficing to sustaine them in health" and were to be made to work at
the occupation for which they were most fitted[217]. If any vagrant
was skilful in any of these occupations and a citizen were willing to
employ him, the governors were to try to make arrangements for him
to be taken into service. Over the rest of the London poor also the
parochial officials were commanded to keep a strict watch. In each
parish the constable, churchwardens, collectors and six parishioners
were to make a general survey of all their needy neighbours. The name,
age and sex of each was to be noted and pensions were to be given to
those who were disabled. Children were to go to Christ's Hospital if
there was room, and if not were to be provided for by the parish. The
able-bodied poor were told to make "their mone" to the churchwardens or
collectors and were to obtain a "Bill" signed by two of them and then
to be provided with work at Bridewell or elsewhere.

[217] Orders 3 to 8, printed edition.

It is even suggested both that all the poor should be visited "daily if
it may be ... to see how they apply theyr work" and that "Such youth,
and other as are able to labour and may have worke and shal be found
idle shall have some maner of correction by the parents, or otherwise
as shalbe thought good in the parish. And if they wyll not amend they
shalbe sent to Bridewell to be reasonably corrected there." Thus the
two main features of these orders were first, that the parochial
officers were to exercise a very strict surveillance over all the poor
of their district and were to provide the impotent poor with outdoor
relief, and secondly, that the City officers were to punish vagrants
and find work for the unemployed. No one was to be allowed to settle
his own affairs; fellow citizens and fellow parishioners were to
provide work and see it done, and were also to see that the youth of
the City were well trained.

Some efforts were made to provide against some of the difficulties
which were likely to hinder the execution of these commands. In order
to lessen the charges as much as possible the governors were to try
to persuade the masters of ships to engage their men from Bridewell;
they also adopted the very modern expedient of registering the names of
employers who were willing to give work to the poor who were sent to
them[218]. The old regulation was reaffirmed that the goods made by the
poor should be sent to the Companies and paid for by them so as far as
possible to prevent competition between the pauper-made goods and those
of the free citizens.

[218] Order 52. "Also a note shall be kept in Bridewell of places and
persons where and of whome worke may be had, that poore in parishes
sent thether to require worke may be the better releved."

The funds necessary for carrying out this organisation were to be
provided by a tax of two-fifteenths and by revising "the bookes of
taxations for the poore[219]." Besides "for helpe of the Hospitals and
Parishes in this charge all churchwardens and collectors for the poore
be strayghtly charged to execute the lawe against such as come not to
church, against al persons without exception, and specially against
such as while they ought to be at divine service, doo spend their time
and their money lewdly in haunting of plaies and other idle and wycked
pastimes and exercises."

[219] Orders 57 and 59.

Some steps were taken to put these orders in execution and twenty-five
occupations were practised in Bridewell. Amongst these were such trades
as the making of gloves, silk lace, pins, bays, felts and tennis balls,
so that some of the workers must have required considerable skill[220].
But on the whole the new rules suggest the comment "Easier said than
done," and so apparently the City authorities found. The Lord Mayor
complains of the difficulty of keeping order in the City in consequence
of the increase in the number of the poor owing to the erection of
many small houses in Kentish Street just across the boundary of the
City[221]. Even in 1594 begging was not entirely abolished. In that
year a new set of orders was drawn up with the object of repressing
vagrants, and it is provided that "no suche poor people as by reason
of age and other infirmitie have been allowed heretofore to aske and
take almes of well-disposed persons be henceforth so permitted to doe
any more but that the wardes whear they inhabit be forced to maintain
them in some convenient sort without begging or straying[222]."

[220] Order 61 in the printed edition of the Orders, a copy of which is
in the Guildhall Library. _Journals_, XX. 2 f. 502.

[221] _Remembrancia_, II. 74.

[222] _Remembrancia_, II. 76.

The measures of London on the whole indicate a good deal of activity on
the part of the City rulers, but until the close of the period there is
little sign of success. In London as elsewhere it is a period rather
of the growth of organisation than of successful administration. Still
the kind of system adopted throws a great deal of light on the social
ideals of the time. The daily visiting of the poor and the constant
watch that was to be kept over them show that little respect was paid
to individual freedom. On the other hand the orders of 1579 indicate
that the municipality endeavoured to carry out the provisions of the
Elizabethan Poor Laws for the employment of those who wanted work and
the relief of all who were in need of maintenance.

[Sidenote: 2. The organisation of Norwich.]

But the system adopted by Norwich is the most remarkable of the
municipal organisations of the time. As early as 1565 the Dean and
Chapter granted St Paul's Hospital to the city. This hospital was
also called the "Systers of Normans" and had been used partly as an
alms-house and partly as a house of entertainment for poor strangers.
It was one of the conditions of the grant that the provision for the
poor should be maintained, and after 1565 part of the building was
made into a House of Correction for the poor who would not work[223].
The establishment of the Bridewell by itself was of little good, and
we hear that in 1570 the poor of the city were in a state of great
disorder, and that the citizens contrived to effect an entirely new
state of things. So well did they succeed that the fame of their
system was known in all parts of the country, and the Archbishop of
Canterbury asked for information as to their proceedings. The citizens
consequently drew up an account of their doings and a "copi of the
wrighting lefte with may L. of Cant. grace the 19 April 1572" is still
preserved[224]. There the citizens state that in 1570 there were more
than two thousand beggars in the city. That in consequence of this the
beggars were demoralised. They were idle and would not work at all,
they became wasteful and threw away the food given to them, and they
also became drunkards and lived wicked lives, and so were a scandal
to the whole town. Moreover, although beggars were fed, they were
improperly clothed and housed, and consequently contracted disease and
were a centre of physical as well as moral pollution. Besides, there
were no proper means taken to clear the city of strange beggars, and
the number of poor in the city continually increased. We are told also
that the statute (of 1563) was not successful in inducing people to
contribute sufficient alms "upon which occasion was forced to followe
compulsion," and a collection was therefore made both to restrain the
loiterers and to relieve the poor.

[223] J. Kirkpatrick, _History of Religious Orders, &c. of Norwich_, p.
219. The accounts of the Bridewell begins in 1565. In 1598 the House of
Correction was removed to St Andrew's.

[224] The following account of the transactions at this time concerning
the poor of Norwich is derived from two large folio volumes. They are
in manuscript and are bound in leather. One is entitled "The Maiores
Booke for the Poore." Inside the cover is written "This booke made in
the feaste of St John the Baptiste 1576. In the xviii^{th} yere of the
rayne of our soveraigne Ladie Elizabeth by the grace of god quene of
Enland, France and Irelande defender of the faithe and dothe containe
certaine orders made for the poore of the Citie of Norwiche as allso
the names of everie of them, the saide poore regestrede in everie
warde vewede. Beginnynge the xx^{th} day of June 1571 according to a
statut made. And allso what searcementes ware made for the wekelye
contribution unto suche as had neede of whome the same sholde be
receivede, and lykewise to whome the same sholde be payede. With the
names of the Deaconnes and collectors, tharefore appoyntede, in everie
warde to receive and make distribution thereof, according to the
same orders, and accordinge to the commandemente of Mr Maior and the
Justices from tyme to tyme." This book is continued down to the year
1579. The second book contains the proceedings from 1571 to 1580. Both
volumes often contain the same entries in almost the same words; the
census is given only in the first volume, the orders are fully quoted
only in the second. The contents of the "wrighting" to the Archbishop
of Canterbury are given in different versions in both books. Besides
this there is a little book containing in rougher notes the list of
poor who are to depart the City, to receive money or to be placed
with the "select women." Lastly there is a loose paper containing the
accounts of the different collectors, with the aldermen of the wards.

The condition of affairs here depicted shows that the relief of the
poor was an urgent practical necessity, and that when the existing law
proved insufficient the citizens had no hesitation in imposing other
regulations of their own.

They began by making an elaborate census of all the poor in the city.
They give the name, age, occupation and dwelling of every man, woman
and child of the poorer classes. They stated whether they received
alms or not, and they sent a small number away from the city or to the
House of Correction. The greater number they classified as "able to
work," "not able to work," and "indifferent." Most of these poor people
were able to work and very few altogether incapable[225]. There were
nearly four hundred men, more than eight hundred women, and almost a
thousand children thus enumerated. The men belonged to every kind of
trade, there were many weavers, tailors, carpenters and glaziers. The
women more often than not spun white warp. With regard to the children
it is astonishing how often the little boys of seven and eight go to
school[226] and sometimes also the little girls. Children of six are
often reported to be "idle[227]." We shall have many other proofs of
the fact that some attention to popular education was not a creation
of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, but that it was fairly
general during the days of good Queen Bess and the first half of the
seventeenth century. Work was however begun sometimes by very young
children, especially by the girls. For example, Gifferne Potterne a
"cordiner and in worke and Anne his wife that botcheth" had three
daughters, the eldest was nine years old and span, while the others
went to school: two of the youngest workers were two daughters of
Christobell Roll, "the eldiste of the age of seven yeres," these packed
wool. There are many other entries of the same kind that show that the
children began to work when they were nine or ten or younger still.

[225] Thus in Middle Wymer the classification was as follows:--

            Indifferent   Able to work   Not able to work

  Men           20             50              14
  Women         32             89              13
  Children      58             52              69

In other districts a few were ordered to depart and one or two were
described as disreputable.

[226] Thus Richard Smith has one sonne "that goe to scole at times."
See Appendix.

[227] Thus the following is a fairly typical entry concerning a man
belonging to the parish of St John's on the Hill in the ward of
"Bearestrete":

  In Nichols | Roger Mason of the age of 56 yeres tailor that worketh, and
   fleman's  | Elizabeth, his wyfe, of the age of 38 yeres that spins white
     house   | warpe and one daughter of the age of 6 yeres that is idle; he
 iii^d a weke| hath dwelt here 32 yeres.
    indiff.  |

See also Appendix where the part of the census relating to St Peter's
of Southgate is printed.

After the census had been made the Mayor, John Aldriche, issued a
proclamation forbidding begging altogether in the streets of Norwich
and ordering all strange beggars to depart. All the poor of the city
who could not work were to be relieved and the others were to be "set
on work." A new assessment was therefore made and the contributions
were in many cases considerably increased[228].

[228] The following are the first four names in the list for St John
Sepulchre:

                      p^d before    pay now

  Mr Haydon gent.        vid.        viiid.
  Mr Smyth                0d.        iiiid.
  Richard Blofield       iii           vid.
  Robert Spingold        iid.          iid. etc.


The poor who were to receive relief were then specified, and the
payments made to them though still small are greater than they had been
before. Other arrangements were also made: some were sent away from the
city; others were placed with the "select women"; masters were found
for the youths, and inquiries were made to see that servants were hired
for the whole year[229].

[229] Thus for example an order is made that "Elizabeth Browne of the
age of 18 years to be enquered for at John Croland, a duch man in St
Michael of Bearstreet, whether she be hired by the yere or elles to go
to service."

The Mayor was to be the Master of Bridewell, four aldermen were
appointed commissioners of the poor and all officers were to be
appointed by him. Regulations concerning Bridewell were made: a bailiff
was appointed and twelve incorrigible idlers were to be kept at work
there[230].

[230] See Appendix for the orders for the "balie of Bridewell."

But besides Bridewell in every ward "select" women were to be
appointed, and they were to receive women, maidens or children "whose
parents are not hable to pay for theyr learninge." These were to be so
taught "as labore and learninge shall be easier than idleness," and
the work was to be done "trewelie and workmanlye" under pain of sharp
correction[231]. The deacons were to see after the rest of the poor;
to set those fit to service to serve, to place others with the select
women, to relieve those that wanted help and to see that none begged or
were brought up in idleness[232].

[231] See Appendix for the orders for children and others.

[232] See Appendix for the orders for deacons.

Besides all this an orphanage was refounded at St Giles' where twelve
children were to be brought up until they could maintain themselves.

A little later certain aldermen and commoners were appointed who
presented an elaborate series of orders to the assembly. These were
adopted and a very thorough organisation was introduced.

Begging was entirely prohibited and every beggar was to receive six
stripes with the whip; the people who gave to beggars were also to pay
the fine ordered by statute and fourpence for every time besides.

These orders were put in force about May, 1571, and when they had been
adopted about a year the citizens enumerate the great advantages they
had derived from them. "Theis orders have been attried," they write,
and "put in practize in the seyd Citie and is founde to redowne to
theis commodities thereafter ensuing."

They proceed to enumerate the sums earned by nine hundred children at
sixpence a week; of sixty-four men "which dailie did begge and lived
ydlie and now beinge forced to worke" earned on an average a shilling
a week; and of one hundred and eighty women who earned twenty pence
each a week "one with another." Strange beggars were sent out of the
city, and the poor were better looked after and no longer had need of
collections for the healing of their miserable diseases. Altogether
the citizens reckoned they saved £2818. 1_s._ 4_d._ a year in money.
Besides this the most disorderly kinds of people no longer resorted
to the city "and the magistrates trobles for them be marvellouselye
easied."

This organisation of 1570 was essentially a municipal organisation, but
we can see that the statutes considerably influenced the town rulers
of the time. They had tried the semi-voluntary system of collection
authorised by the statute of 1563, and had found that funds could not
be collected in this manner. They therefore employed more compulsion
without any hesitation. They punished "according to the statute" people
who gave to beggars, and they added a special fine of their own. The
statutes themselves made the organisation for the collection of funds
municipal as well as parochial and it is interesting to see this double
system in working order. The deacons collected the rates of their
particular parishes and paid the pensions granted to the poor. But it
was the Mayor or his deputies who saw that everyone was assessed at
the proper amount. The payments of a parish did not necessarily meet
the expenses; the rich parishes paid for the poorer ones. The deacons
accounted to the aldermen responsible for the ward; and some paid to
them their surplus while others received the sums necessary to make up
the deficiency[233].

[233] A paper among the Norwich records contains the sums paid to the
aldermen and the amount given by them to the deacons of the different
parishes. Other accounts in the "Maiores booke" show the sums given by
the deacons and by the commissioners for the medical treatment of the
poor. Thus in 1571-2 a deacon paid iiii_d._ to "Glavin's wife to heal
Tom Parker's leg," while Mr Thomas Beament paid 6/8_d._ to "Mother
Colls for healinge a broken legg of Margarete Paine, a pore wydow in
the Normans."

Norwich seems to have been the first English town to prohibit begging
altogether; the system of licensed beggars was still employed in most
parts of the country.

The detailed accounts for the poor of Norwich were preserved down to
1580 and show that the organisation was in full working order for
ten years. One of the compilations relating to this organisation was
begun in 1576 and the whole tone of this book shows that the citizens
of Norwich were very proud of their doings in matters concerning the
poor[234]. It is perhaps the only place where the purely municipal
organisation for the poor was successful for any length of time. There
were difficulties again in the seventeenth century but as long as the
first enthusiasm continued the system seems to have worked well.

[234] _The Maiores Booke for the Poore._ See note 1, p. 102.

The work was done thoroughly and placed on a sound basis. The House
of Correction and the select women were maintained by the side of a
sufficient collection for the relief and training of the poor, and,
probably for these reasons, the system continued to be successful as
long as the administrators continued to give it the necessary amount of
supervision.

The citizens of Norwich seem to have partially overcome one of the
principal difficulties of a purely municipal organisation by very
rigorous settlement regulations, quite as severe as any that were ever
enforced after the statute of 1662. For instance a Jane Thornton is to
depart because she "in summer live in the cuntrie but in wint^r charge
the citie," and "Richard Birch and his familie" were to go to Thorpe
though he was not at this time (1570) in receipt of alms. There are
many cases of the same kind and these continue throughout this period
of ten years and occur again in the seventeenth century.

This kind of action with regard to new settlers was not confined to
Norwich but probably extended to all parts of the country where there
was much systematic relief of the poor.

[Sidenote: 3. The action of other towns.]

We will now consider some of the various plans for the relief and
organisation of the poor adopted in other towns.

We will first see how the municipal authorities dealt with settlement;
we will then investigate various methods of dealing with the
unemployed; and lastly we will examine the different ways in which
funds were collected.

[Sidenote: 3. (1) With regard to the settlement of new comers.]

With regard to questions concerning the expulsion of new comers the
statute of Charles II. (13 and 14 Car. II. c. 12) does not appear to
initiate a new custom. Municipal control in this matter begins before
1569. Whenever the town made a vigorous attempt to maintain its own
poor, many efforts were made to prevent new comers from settling within
its borders. Sometimes the landlords were forbidden to subdivide
tenements or build more houses of the poorer sort; sometimes the
citizens were fined for entertaining poor inmates, and sometimes the
inmates themselves were ordered to depart.

Thus in London the landlords first are restrained. In a resolution of
the Common Council of 5 Edw. VI. it is stated that "capytell messuages
and houses" had been turned into alleys and the class of vagabonds was
greatly increased. It is therefore ordered that the inhabitants of
these alleys should pay their rent to the House of the Poor in West
Smithfield and not to their landlords[235].

[235] _Journals_, Vol. XVI. f. 127.

In Aug. 1557 it is not only the landlords but the occupiers who are to
blame, and they are ordered to put out of their houses "vagaboundes,"
"masterles men" and "evill disposed persons," and in future not to
receive any one of the sort[236].

[236] _Ib._ Vol. XVII. f. 42 _b_

The municipal rulers of Ipswich also, in 1557, the year in which a
compulsory Poor Rate was enforced, appointed "searchers for newcommers
into the Towne[237]," and in 1578 provided that searches shall be made
forthwith "for new commers and servants, retained for less than one
yere," and that the constables are to warn new comers to depart the
town[238].

[237] Nathaniel Bacon's _Annals of Ipswich_, p. 249.

[238] _Ib._ p. 319.

In Cambridge in 1556 an inquiry had been made concerning new comers
but apparently the town rulers were not very vigilant, for in 1584 the
Privy Council ordered them to remove as many small tenements as might
be consistent with the public convenience[239].

[239] C. H. Cooper, _Annals of Cambridge_, Vol. II. p. 398. See note p.
93.

In St Albans as at Norwich we find that the regulations were very
complete. In 1586 monthly searches were instituted: and the searchers
were commanded "in the limits of their several Wards" to "make search
for such new comers to the town as being poor may be likely to be
chargeable to the same, and if they shall find any such within either
of their several Divisions to give notice thereof to Mr Mayor, that
order may be taken for their sending away[240]." We hear of orders
made for the expulsion of particular poor people because they were
likely to be in need of relief, and in some cases we can see that this
practice caused great hardship to individuals. Thus John Tompson, a
joiner, had taken a poor woman into his house and as she was likely to
become chargeable she was ordered to quit the borough[241]. Moreover
we have the later plan of finding sureties already in operation.
John Palmer was admitted a freeman, a Thomas Browne undertaking that
Palmer's children should not become chargeable to the Borough[242].

[240] A. E. Gibbs, _The Corporation Records of St Albans_, Oct. 1st,
1596, p. 14.

[241] _Ib._ Ap. 15th, 1588, p. 24. Orders for sending poor people away
in order that they might not become chargeable were made on many other
occasions. _Ib._ pp. 12, 26 and 45.

[242] _Ib._ Feb. 5th, 1587/8, p. 24. See also p. 37, Oct. 19th,
1590. Gabriel Hill, a new comer, was brought before the Mayor to give
sureties that he and his wife and children should not become chargeable
to the borough. Sept. 1st, 1593. Nich. Cobell had to give sureties,
bring a testimonial from his former parish, pay 4_d._ quarterly towards
the parson's stipend and a certain sum weekly to the poor.

We thus see that the statute of Charles II. did not impose hardships
on the poor never before endured. It is a curious instance of the
adoption by statute of a custom that had long existed. The custom had
been enforced without statutory authority while the town government
continued to possess semi-independent powers, but it could not be
enforced without statutory authority in later times. The statute
therefore stereotyped a custom that had long been in existence in the
towns and would otherwise have become obsolete.

This practice of preventing settlement has a far closer connection with
the social order of the reign of Elizabeth than with that of Charles
II. It was a great hardship to the poor, but it was a hardship to which
they had long been partially accustomed and which fitted in with the
economic policy of the towns.

In most towns the right of exercising skilled trades and of opening
shops was denied to any but freemen so that many difficulties were
already imposed on the settlement of new comers. The organised relief
of the poor increased these difficulties, it is true, but it did not
altogether create them.

But it is more interesting to examine the experiments of the time with
regard to the unemployed.

[Sidenote: 3. (2) The action of towns with regard to the unemployed.]

In some districts a stock of materials was purchased either by private
charity or by municipal funds. Portions of these materials were given
to the poor that they might manufacture them. The finished article
was then returned and afterwards sold, while the worker was paid
according to the value of his labour. Sometimes a master was employed
to teach the trade. Thus a Mr Watts left certain lands to the Mayor and
Corporation of Rochester partly for this purpose. An old parchment roll
contains the rules of the charity. The Mayor was to choose one honest
citizen or several as "Providours of the Poore." The "Providours" were
directed to buy flax and wool "to set the poor to work." This was to be
worked into yarn and the spinners were to be paid for their labour. The
yarn was to be sold in the open market, if possible, at a profit[243].
The same kind of plan was probably in operation at Canterbury and
Colchester. Archbishop Grindal bequeathed a hundred pounds to
Canterbury[244] for the purpose of providing the needy inhabitants
with work, and Lady Judde left a like sum to Colchester "as a stock
to buy and provide from time to time Wool, Yarn, Flax and such other
merchandize and things as the season should require; for the setting on
work such poor persons, inhabiting within the said Town, and Liberties
of the same, as should be able to work and labour[245]."

[243] _Hist. Man. Com. Rep._ IX. App. 1, p. 286. The will was made
in 1579, and six years later an agreement was made with the widow
under which the Mayor agreed to purchase hemp as directed. _Hist. of
Rochester_ (S. Denne), p. 220.

[244] W. Somner, _Antiquities of Canterbury_, p. 273.

[245] P. Morant, _Essex_, Vol. I. p. 164.

In St Albans we know more of the details of the experiment and find
that there training was provided as well as employment and the funds
were furnished by the town. In 1588 the town rulers engaged a Dutchman
named Anthony Moner to teach the poor of the town to spin worsted and
other yarns[246]. Eight pounds were taken from the town chest in order
to pay for the looms, combs and wheels which were to be used. Inquiries
were made throughout the town for poor children who could be spared
to learn the new trade; they were to be taught in six weeks and then
paid for their labour[247]. About the same time terms were arranged for
four men to be taught by the Dutchman. When taught they were to be paid
through "the Company[248]," so that apparently the custom of St Albans
was like that of London; the work of the poor was sold through the
Company representing the citizen workers of the same occupation. The
corporation paid £10 for the original stock of wool and every two tods
were to be paid for when the next were fetched[249]. The undertaking is
therefore partly an example of the employment of the poor by municipal
capital and partly an early instance of technical education provided by
town rulers.

[246] A. Gibbs, _Corporation Records of S. Albans_, p. 28, June
10th, 1588. The spinning of fine worsted and certain light yarns was
introduced into England about this time, and was taught mainly by the
foreign refugees from France or Holland.

[247] _Corporation Records of S. Albans_, Sept. 2nd, 1588. The next
year it was agreed that the children should be paid for their labour
when they had been taught six weeks. _Ib._ Jan. 20th, 1588/9.

[248] _Ib._ Feb. 17th, 1588/9.

[249] _Ib._ Sept. 29th, 1588.

Something of the same kind was probably done at York. In 1578, £400
was raised for "settyng the poor of this citie on worke," half of
which was contributed by the city and half from the money of Sir
William Bowes. In the will of Thomas Brafferton money was also left
for this purpose and more detailed directions were given as to its
use. A stock of wool, flax or hemp was to be bought and "delivered
within the parishe of Thornabie to be by them wrought and made into
cloth and the poore people for the working thereof to be paid after
such rate as nowe or hereafter shallbe used for such lyke work within
the said parishe[250]." In 1591 proposals were made for the same kind
of undertaking at Lincoln, and a technical school was established
at the expense of the corporation[251]. At Leicester also the town
contributed money on several occasions to set the poor people to
work[252]. In 1597 the Court of Quarter Sessions in Devonshire make an
order that means for setting the poor to work should be provided by the
local justices as if this were quite a usual practice[253]. There is
no reason to suppose that the instances above quoted are exceptional.
There is however more evidence on the subject during the next period.

[250] "City of York in the Sixteenth Century," Miss Maud Sellars. _The
English Historical Review_, April 1894, pp. 288, 289.

[251] _Lincoln Hist. Man. Com. Report_, XIV. App. viii.

p. 74. On July 31, 1591, "A committee appointed to confer with Mr Grene
of Boston who has offered to set 400 poor people of Lincoln on work for
five years at wool, if the city will find him a convenient house and
lend him 300_l._ freely for the five years."

p. 17. Among the manuscripts described is a "fragment consisting of
eight small quarto leaves of a book of orders made in 1591 and 1592
respecting a knitting school established by the city." This contains
the following information:

8th Oct. 1591. Cheeseman undertakes under certain conditions to teach
a competent number of women and men how to knit and "to hide nothing
from them that belongeth to the knowledge of the said science." Four
aldermen were appointed overseers.

28 July, 1592. Forty stone of wool to be provided.

4 Aug. 1592. Articles of agreement made at the Knitters House in St
Saviourgate between John Cheeseman and Francis Newby.

In this agreement Francis Newby and his wife Jane undertook to attend
regularly at Cheeseman's house to learn his trade of knitting,
spinning, dressing of wool and keeping his mill. Newby and his wife
were to have the oversight and teaching of thirty scholars. They were
to be paid 40_s._, twopence for every pair of stockings knitted by a
scholar and the full price of their own work. They were also to have
such profit as might arise from "amending and footing all stockings"
brought unto them.

On the same day it was agreed by the Corporation that the Knitter
should be paid 16_s._ 8_d._ for ten wheels which he had provided and
the overseers arranged to visit the school in turn.

This Lincoln school very closely resembles the experiment tried at St
Albans. It shows the corporation attempting to provide employment and
technical education at the same time for the children of the town.

[252] For Leicester see _Growth of English History and Commerce_, W.
Cunningham, Vol. II., p. 60 note.

[253] Alexander H. A. Hamilton, _Quarter Sessions from Queen Elizabeth
to Queen Anne_, p. 16. At Windsor also the following resolution was
adopted: "All the brethren of the hall and all other inhabitants shall
be assessed according to their ability by the subsidie after the rate
of 12_d._ in the pound towards levying of a stock to set the poore on
work." Mr Gwyn and Mr Harris were appointed Governors of the poore for
the first year. _Annals of Windsor._ I. 637. Tighe and Davis quoting
Ash. Mans. No. 1126.

But perhaps more often a workhouse or hospital was erected. At Reading
one was built on the site of the house of the Grey Friars. This
hospital contained twenty-one children and fourteen old persons. The
funds were provided by the poor's box, by private contributions, by
collections in the three parishes, and by the work of the poor. The
accounts are in existence from 1578 to 1648, and the value of the work
of the poor was very considerable. For the fourth quarter of the year
1578 it amounted to £12. 8_s._ 8_d._[254], and this at a time when the
ordinary sum paid for the maintenance of an adult poor person was about
a shilling a week. There were also Poor Houses at Colchester and at
King's Lynn[255].

[254] Coates' _Reading_, pp. 307-8.

[255] Morant's _Essex_, p. 182. For King's Lynn see Chapter XI.

But the most general arrangement made for the unemployed poor and
for vagrants was the erection of a House of Correction. The House of
Correction before the Civil War was not in all cases nearly so much
like a gaol as it afterwards became. Often it was also a hospital for
the old, and an industrial school for the young. Christ's Hospital at
Ipswich is a good example of this kind of institution. This hospital
was founded in 1569 and was controlled by the town. Governors were
elected yearly who were to meet every week, and a paid official called
a guider was appointed to look after the poor there. In 1594 and
in 1597 such guiders were elected and the orders drawn up on these
occasions tell us the nature of their duties. In 1597 for every person
sent to the hospital who was to be forced to work and "corrected" the
guider was to receive fourpence, after that he had nothing for their
keep but their work. But for others who were sent to Christ's Hospital
and were not to be "corrected," twelve pence a week was paid, and the
value of their work also. In the orders of 1594 the guider is allowed
eightpence a week for those unable to work, and special provisions were
made about the clothing of the children[256]. It is thus quite evident
that at Ipswich the hospital was used, not only for vagrants, but also
for children and for the impotent; not only for people who deserved
punishment, but also for people who were simply in need of relief.

[256] Bacon's _Annals of Ipswich_, 25 Oct., 1594, and 8 Dec., 1597.

In the well-known example of the House of Correction at Bury the scale
of diet and daily routine are specified. There were two principal
meals, dinner and supper, and on days when meat was eaten everyone
was to have eight ounces of rye bread, a pint of porridge, a quarter
of a pound of meat and a pint of beer; on the fast days instead of
meat one-third of a pound of cheese or one or two herrings were
provided. Those that behaved well were allowed a little bread and beer
in addition, and those that would not work were limited to bread and
beer only. On the whole the diet compares favourably with that of a
modern workhouse. All were to rise at four in the summer and five in
the winter, and had to work until seven, with intervals for morning and
evening prayer. The amount of punishment was minutely regulated; the
"sturdy rogues" were to receive twelve stripes, while those guilty a
second time of "unchaste or unchristian speeches or behaviour" received
three[257].

[257] Regulations of a House of Correction at Bury, 1589. Printed,
Eden, _The State of the Poor_, Vol. III., Appendix vii.

Many Houses of Correction were built in the later days of Queen
Elizabeth. The "moste parte" of the hospital of Reading was to be
converted into a House of Correction in 1590 "aswell for the settinge
of the poore people to worke, being able to worke for theire reliefes
and for the settinge of idle persons to worke therein as also for
the punishinge and correctinge of idle and vagrant persons[258]." At
York also in 1584, arrangements were made at St Anthony's "for the
punnyshment of such rooges as will not worke[259]."

[258] _Records of the Borough of Reading_, Vol. I. p. 403.

[259] "The City of York in the Sixteenth Century," _The English
Historical Review_, April 1894, p. 288.

Bristol, Winchester, Gloucester and Exeter also founded institutions
of the kind, but at Exeter though one was founded there was some
difficulty connected with it, and we are told that the citizens
"afterwards repented[260]."

[260] Freeman's _Exeter_, p. 177. Seyer's _Bristol_, Vol. II. p. 248.
"This year 1577 was a collection for the erecting of a Bridewell at the
old house called Mombridge, where much cost in building and repairing
was done and one called Meg Lowrey was the first ill person there
corrected." Winchester _Cal. of State Papers_, April 24th and April
29th, 1582. Gloucester Rudder's _Gloucestershire_, p. 190.

Thus before 1597 many Houses of Correction were in existence, and,
though according to several authorities they were allowed to decay for
a time, in the next reign they became general.

But these were not the only methods by which the poor were set to work.
Pressure was put on employers both by public opinion and by official
authority. The Gloucestershire justices report concerning a disturbance
in 1586 and say the clothiers were not in fault, for "the clothiers
here doe yet contynue to keepe their poore in worke as in former tymes
they have donne althoughe it hath been to their greate losses; and soe
they are contented to doe as longe as they maie occupie their trade
without undooing of themselfs[261]." The fact that this report was
made shows that blame was attached to the employer who turned off his
workmen in bad times; to some extent the master and not the man was
expected to take the risk of the fluctuations of the markets. In 1591
the Town Council of Ipswich went further and ordered the clothiers "to
sett the poore on work" within the town, at the same time providing
that, if any refuse the work or misuse their material, they were to be
punished by the bailiffs[262].

[261] _Dom. State Papers, Queen Eliz._, Vol. 189, 50. The report goes
on to say that the clothiers will have to give up their trade, because
since they might only sell to English merchants they could not get
a good price. They say they were working at a loss of 6_s._ 8_d._ a
cloth. See p. 86 _supra_ for the Earl of Leicester's letter to the same
effect.

[262] Bacon's _Annals of Ipswich_, 1st April, 1591.

Thus the provision of work for the unemployed was made in many
different ways. Sometimes materials, teachers and implements were
paid for by municipal capital, often workhouses were established,
occasionally pressure was put on employers, and the most usual plan
of all was to establish a House of Correction, which was used both to
punish vagrants and to relieve the poor. But these attempts to provide
work, though numerous, were not universal and there is some reason to
believe that before 1597 many of these efforts had failed and needed to
be revived in the succeeding years.

[Sidenote: 3. (3) Methods of raising funds.]

The expenses of the organisation for the benefit of the poor were
largely a new charge on the public purse, and difficulty was frequently
experienced in finding the necessary money. Before 1572 there was no
statutory right to make rates for this object, but we have seen that
the borough authorities did enforce compulsory payments and levied
local rates for this and other purposes. The old methods were continued
and new ones tried during the period from 1569 to 1597. Sometimes the
basis employed was that used for national taxation. The chief direct
national taxes of the time were fifteenths and subsidies. A fifteenth
was nominally a tax on moveables, but after 1334 the total amount never
altered, and each town had to pay an invariable sum[263] which was
apportioned from time to time among the local inhabitants; lists would
thus be prepared of how much everyone had to pay, and these furnished
a convenient basis of local taxation. Probably the earliest compulsory
payment for the poor was the fifteenth levied in 1547 in London, and in
1579 two more fifteenths were imposed there in order to carry out the
organisation of that year[264]. At other times fractions of a subsidy
were exacted for local objects. In 1585 in order to meet "the charge of
the poore" at Ipswich the fourth part of a subsidy was levied "uppon
suche as are in the subsidy," while the rest were to be assessed by
a Committee "according to their best discretion[265]." At Bury also
the subsidy book was utilised for this purpose in 1589 when the House
of Correction was founded. Every person whose land was rated "in the
subsedy booke" at twenty shillings was to pay sixpence in the pound,
and every person "being sett in the subsedye book at 3 _li._ goods to
paie IIII^d[266]."

[263] Thus a fifteenth at Reading raised "xxiiii_li._ xiii_d._ ob. ut
patet per recordum in Scaccario domini Regis inde factum et per veterem
compotum per collectores inde similiter factum." _Records of Reading_,
I. 87, 1489.

[264] See p. 30. See Cannan, _The History of Local Rates_, p. 20.

[265] Bacon, _Annals of Ipswich_, 8th Oct. 1585, p. 344.

[266] Regulations of a House of Correction at Bury, Suffolk. Eden, Vol.
III. Appendix vii.

Another method of collecting money for the poor was by means of local
dues. At Ipswich tolls were exacted from ships entering the harbour,
and payments were also made by all who were admitted freemen, by all
who had "a writing acknowledged," and by all who had a witness examined
before the bailiffs in writing[267]. Sometimes fines and payments by
individuals for particular privileges were devoted to this purpose. At
Ipswich those who opened shops on Sunday paid their fines to Christ's
Hospital. A parson who had incurred a penalty by suing for too much
tithe was ordered to deliver to the hospital "60 combes of tanne[268],"
and a man of St Albans obtained a license to keep an alehouse before
anyone else on condition that he paid twopence weekly towards the
support of a certain orphan[269]. Akin to this method of raising money
was the practice of persuading a man to take a town apprentice in
return for the freedom of the town or some other privilege[270].

[267] Bacon's _Annals of Ipswich_, 19 Sept. 1571, p. 292, and 1575, p.
307.

[268] _Ib._ 16 July, 1571. A burgess who neglected to attend the Great
Court was fined fourpence "to the use of the poore." _Ib._ 5th Mar.
1568, p. 279.

[269] A. Gibbs, _Corporation Records of St Albans_, p. 46.

[270] At St Albans in 1587 two men were reported for carrying on their
trade as fullers without being freemen. It was resolved that one of
them should have his freedom if he would bring up one of the children
of a widow Floyd until it could get its own living. _Corporation
Records_, p. 27. At Ipswich Peter Ray, a tailor, was made a burgess
provided he took an apprentice from the hospital. Nathaniel Bacon's
_Annals of Ipswich_, 22nd July, 1575, p. 306. In Ipswich also a
"fforainer" having a town child as his apprentice was allowed to
trade with his linen cloth in the town on market-day so long as the
apprentice remained with him. _Ib._ 24th April, 1599, p. 398.

Soon after the accession of Elizabeth new methods began to be adopted,
and a special scale of payments was fixed where the poor were
concerned. In 1570 at Norwich the citizens neglected to give according
to their ability and so compulsion had to follow. The basis of the
first assessment was the old voluntary collection. If a new-comer
arrived after 1576 he was taken to the mayor or his deputy and assessed
by him at a suitable sum[271]. In London also we have seen that the
first assessment under the statute of 1572 was based on the payments
formerly made, but the amounts were to be increased when there was
any cause. In Ipswich also by 1579 there was apparently a special
assessment for the poor, for it was then ordered that "all the persons
in this Towne rated to pay to the poore, shall presently pay soe
much mony as by computation his rate shall amount unto for one monthe
and neverthelesse continue the paym^{ts} of their rates as they are
rated[272]." It seems that in Ipswich the practice of levying poor
rates according to the value of the house was already adopted.

[271] Orders given to the "Overseers of everie parish" in 1576, 1577,
1578, entered in the "Maiores Booke for the Poore."

[272] Bacon's _Annals of Ipswich_, 4 Dec., 1579.

Sometimes a large sum of money was raised at one time to form what was
called a "stock." This fund was let out at interest to various people
or invested in land and the sums arising from this interest or rent
were used though the capital remained untouched. During the reign of
Elizabeth the various public bodies lent out a good deal of the money
in their hands in this manner. In 1584 there was an inquiry into the
management of funds so raised at Winchester and the bishop sent a
declaration on the subject to the Council. Some of the money had been
used for the poor in the parishes and some for the House of Correction.
A hundred and twenty pounds had been given for the use of the poor
in the parish of Twiford; this had been lent at the rate of ten per
cent. and the £12 so obtained had been or was about to be distributed
to the poor[273]. The large sum of £1009 had been spent on the House
of Correction and no proper account was made. In future, however, the
justices were to levy a rate on the parish so that no parish paid more
than fourpence a week and so that the average amounted to twopence.

[273] The gentlemen responsible for the sums belonging to the other
parishes were not present, but it was resolved that these funds
also should be lent on good security and the interest only used for
distribution "so that the stocke may still remayne to the like reliefe
of the poore hereafter." _Dom. S. P. Qu. Eliz._ Vol. 173, No. 62.

Thus we see that during this period all kinds of plans were tried.
There was no attempt to enforce any theory that the required sum ought
to be levied according to the value of lands occupied or according to
the wealth of the payer. The authorities were sorely puzzled how to
raise the money and adopted any plan that was likely to be successful.

[Sidenote: 4. The events of the years of scarcity 1594-1597.]

We will now consider the events of the years of scarcity from 1594 to
1597, both so far as they concern the central Government and so far as
they concern local officials. They are interesting both because of what
the authorities did during these years and because of what they failed
to do. The year from Sept. 1572 to Sept. 1573 was the last in which
the average price of wheat was under 20/- a quarter. From 1594 onwards
there was a succession of bad harvests owing to the excessive amount
of rain. Wheat quadrupled in price, and barley and rye, which were the
grains ordinarily used for the bread of the poor, rose nearly in the
same proportion[274].

[274] The prices given in the _History of Agriculture and Prices_ are
as follows:

                                  Wheat.             Barley.              Rye.
  Average price per quarter   23_s._ 8¼_d._   12_s._ 10½_d._   17_s._ 2½_d._   Prices are
    of 10 years  1583-1592                                                              not given
  Sept. to Sept. 1594-5       37_s._ 7½_d._   16_s._              32_s._             in 1590
    "        "   1595-6       40_s._ 9½_d._   21_s._ 4_d._        34_s._ 2½_d._   and 1591
    "        "   1596-7       56_s._ 6¼_d._                       52_s._ 9½_d._
    "        "   1597-8       52_s._ 4½_d._   25_s._ 5¼_d._   36_s._

In July 1597 the price reached 96_s._ a quarter at Newcastle. Hatfield
MSS. VII. p. 296.

In 1594, the Privy Council ordered the reissue of the orders of 1587,
and the justices were directed to meet together that they might devise
means of putting them in execution[275]. In 1595 further efforts were
made to enforce these instructions of the Government. The justices
dwelling near London were called to the Star Chamber, and an oration
was delivered to them by the Lord Keeper, which had been committed to
him by the Queen herself without any direction from the Council[276].
He stated that the old custom of making an oration at the beginning
of term had been discontinued heretofore, "but now, considering the
presente scarsitye her Ma^{tie} of her own speciall care and regarde
to her louinge subiectes hathe gyven in charge to us[277], to delyuer
in this place her owne speciall direction for the redresse hereof."
The justices were to overlook "the certificates in former times made
accordinge to some former orders in that case provided" and were
to punish the offences of "corne maisters and mongers" with great
severity. They were to go to the markets and persuade the farmers to
bring their corn, and if need be "to use there authoritie therein."
They themselves, assisted by all those of the better sort, were "to
make a somme of monie" and therewith to buy corn to be sold in every
market without any profit. Moreover the justices were to repair to
their country homes and maintain a hospitable house. The Lord Keeper
also complained that there were too many justices, and Her Majesty
"therefore like a good huswyfe looking unto all her houshold stuffe"
had herself marked the names of some who were no longer to continue in
the commission. Those that remained were to look to the execution of
the statute of retainers, to the keeping of "waches for the punishing
of rouges and idle persons," and "were to exercise Justice with a
Herculean courage[278]." At the same time the Council sent orders to
some particular justices. In 1595 they apparently sent to the justices
of Devonshire and advocated selling corn underprice to the poor: the
justices reply there was no need for such a step for the markets are
well furnished and the price falling[279]. But as a bad harvest again
followed the distress became worse. In 1597 the Lord-Lieutenant also
wrote to the Devonshire magistrates commending the relief of the poor
to their especial care, and this time the Court of Quarter Sessions
immediately issue orders for their relief. The Constables were to
"take a view" of all the poor and of all the wealthy people in the
district and to report the result to the justices. One, two, three
or more people were to have one or two meals given them every day by
each householder. If the householder failed the justices might make
an order for a payment, not exceeding eighteenpence a week "for every
pole." In addition a special rate was to be imposed for setting the
poor to work[280]. Moreover the Lord Chief Justice admonished the
justices of Wiltshire in 1597 probably under instructions from the
Council. The justices are ordered to see that the farmers "allowe one
bushell in every quarter to be solde by the pecke and halffe-pecke to
the poore at eightepence the bushell under the ordinarie price of the
market[281]"; they are also to take care that the markets are well
supplied with corn.

[275] Egerton MSS. 2644. Copy of a set of orders sent by Henry Mildmay
to the justices of a division of Essex. It is signed by Burghley and
other Lords of the Privy Council, and states that the orders issued in
Jan. of the 29th year of the Queen's reign were now renewed and that
these justices were to meet and put them in execution.

[276] "Par sa devise demesne." _Les Reportes del Cases in Camera
Stellata_, 1593-1609, John Hawarde, edited by W. P. Baildon, F.S.A., p.
19. Hawarde was a barrister of the Middle Temple: he wrote his volumes
from rough notes taken in Court, but does not seem to have verified his
references. _Ib._ Introd. p. vii.

[277] The Lord Treasurer and Lord Keeper.

[278] _Les Reportes_ (_l.c._) p. 21. June 3rd, 1595. On July 1st,
1596, the justices were again addressed and ordered to return home "in
regarde of eminent daungers." _Ib._ p. 56.

[279] A. Hamilton, _Quarter Sessions from Queen Elizabeth to Queen
Anne_, p. 17.

[280] Hamilton, _Quarter Sessions_, p. 16.

[281] Add. MSS. Brit. Mus. No. 32092, f. 145. See Appendix.

The Earl of Bath received letters concerning the high prices of corn at
Barnstaple and "he with other justices came to town, viewed the market
and set the price upon corn there, to wit wheat 9_s._, rye 6_s._,
barley 5_s._, oats 2_s._, threatening the seller with duress if he
sold for above that price[282]." Very little grain was to be had even
at high prices, and a Mr Stanbury was deputed to go to London in order
that he might help to purchase corn for the town. "God speed him well,"
writes Wyot, "that he may procure some corn for the inhabitants of this
town in this time of scarcity, that there is but little cometh to the
market and such snatching and catching for that little and such a cry
that the like was never heard." Barnstaple was not, however, at the end
of its troubles[283]; in 1597 wheat was sold at 15_s._ and 20_s._ the
bushel, and many of the inhabitants must have starved.

[282] In May 1596 the price of wheat at Barnstaple was 11_s._, rye and
barley 8_s._, oats 2_s._ 4_d._ "whereupon upon letters sent to the
Earl of Bath" presumably from the Council, he set the prices mentioned
in the text. _Barnstaple Records North Devon Herald_, June 3rd, 1880,
quoting from Wyot's Diary. Wyot's Diary is described as a small
quarto book of 52 leaves purporting to contain extracts from an older
manuscript. It was copied by William Palmer in the seventeenth century,
from the diary of Philip Wyot, who was Town Clerk between 1586 to 1608.
_Ib._ April 22nd, 1880.

[283] 1596. "Not a dry day in November." 1597. "April 8th wheat sold
for 18_s._ a bushel, barley 13_s._, rye 14_s._, oats 4_s._ Now in
July by reason of continual rain wheat sold last Friday for 20_s._ a
bushel." The beginning of harvest brought relief and wheat fell to
3_s._ 4_d._, rye 2_s._ 7_d._, and barley 2_s._ 4_d._ This fall to
one-sixth of the former values makes us realise how violent were the
fluctuations in price. A like sudden alteration took place at Bristol
in 1587. On Aug. 12th, 1587, wheat was sold at 5_s._ a bushel, but
on the 19th of the same month it fell to 22_d._ Seyer's _Memoirs of
Bristol_, Vol. II. p. 253.

The Archbishops of York and Canterbury issued letters to the bishops of
their provinces with directions designed to mitigate the sufferings of
the poor. The usual collections for their relief were to be carefully
made and were to be increased. The wealthy were "to use a greater
moderation than heretofore in their diet" and were not to lessen the
number of their households. Not only was everyone to fast on Fridays,
but they were to do without their suppers on Wednesdays also, "to the
intent that that which is by forbearance of that meal and at other
meals, by abstinency from all superfluous fare, fruitfully spared, may
presently, especially by the wealthier sort, be charitably converted
to the relief and comfort of the poor and needy." The ministers and
churchwardens were to send monthly certificates of the observance of
these orders with the names of any who were negligent[284]. We shall
see that in Wakefield this Wednesday fast was observed and it is by no
means improbable that these commands were actually enforced in other
places.

[284] _The Life of John Whitgift_, John Strype. Appendix, Bk. IV.
No. XXX. 27th Dec. 1596. The Minister was to stir up the people "to
abstinence, fasting and true humiliation; to forbear all excess; to
relieve the poor and needy by good house-keeping, by setting them
on work and by other deeds of alms and brotherly compassion. And
considering the most princely and gracious care her Majesty hath for
their relief, and that all good means should be used for the succour
and help of them in these times of dearth, the people must be taught
to endure this scarcity with patience; and especially to beware, how
they give ear to any persuasions or practices of discontented and idle
brains, to move them to repine or swerve from the humble duties of good
subjects." The double purpose of helping the poor and maintaining order
may be observed in this letter of the archbishop as well as in the
direct orders of the Privy Council.

The local authorities also endeavoured to remedy the evil. The
proceedings of the Bristol Corporation illustrate the sudden rise in
price and the great need there was for measures of relief. In 1594 the
Mayor, Francis Knight, laid out money "to provide corn for the common
sort of people," and by his means corn was brought from Danzig to
Bristol. One of the aldermen also, a Mr Thomas Aldworth, spent £1200
in corn and brought a certain quantity into the market every day. Next
year the scarcity continued, and in November a Mr Whitson was asked to
buy corn for the Corporation. He did so and arranged that 3000 quarters
of rye should arrive in May, 1596, and cost 28_s._ the quarter. But
the Mayor alleged the corn was too dear and the Corporation would pay
but half of Mr Whitson's charges to London and would only agree to buy
half the rye. "But so it fell out, that when the said rye was arrived
in Bristol, it was well worth 44_s._ a quarter and more. And then the
said Mayor and Aldermen intreated to have the whole bargain and would
pay Mr Whitson 50_li._ for his charges and running the adventure of the
bargain, whereupon after some persuasion he (being of a good nature)
consented." The corn was badly needed and within twenty days was sold
at 6_s._ a bushel, though even that sum was under the market price. The
Corporation gained £774 on the bargain and many pecks and half-pecks
were given to the poor.

Still this corn lasted but twenty days, and during 1596 and 1597 corn
was sold in Bristol at 7_s._, 8_s._, 12_s._, 16_s._, and according to
one authority even 20_s._ a bushel. Under these circumstances the poor
could not live, and it was decided by Mayor and Council that every
alderman or any burgess, that had any property, should every day give
one meal of meat to the poor people who were out of work. Some were
to feed eight persons, and some only two, according to their ability.
"Whereby," says the chronicler, "the poor of our city were all relieved
and kept from starving or rising." The justices seem to have been
vigilant in other directions also; they would allow no grain to be
exported and ordered that very little malt should be made[285].

[285] Seyer's _Memoirs of Bristol_, Vol. II., pp. 254 and 255, quoting
from Adams and Ricart's _Chronicle_.

In London the difficulty was great: in 1594 Lord Howard sent up three
ships laden with corn that the inhabitants might have bread, and in
1596 twenty ships carrying grain arrived from the Low Countries[286].

[286] _Remembrancia_, II. 31. Apparently other ships were sent in 1595.
_Ib._ II. 95; II. 59.

This grain may have been used for the whole country. An old chronicler
of Shrewsbury relates that in 1596 "there was provision made by the
bailiffs and aldermen of Shrewsburie with the commons for corne at
London which cam from Dansicke, Denmark and those foren places to ease
all England, and especially London. There was provided about 3,200
bushels for this town: it came by way of Brestow, and was sold to the
commons after the rate of 8_s._ the bushell of rie, which was in the
market at 12_s._ and better: and wheate at 14_s._ and 15_s._ Also there
was prepared to be baked of the said rye 40 bushells weeakely by the
towne bakers in peny bredd, two peny, three peny, and foure peny breed
for the poore to have it who were not able to by any bigger portion.
They were so unruly and gredie to have it, that the baylyffs, sixe men
and other officers had mutche adoe to serve them. The God most mightie
send plentie that his chosen flocke perrishe not, and dy for want as
many in all contreis in England die and goe in great numbers myserably
a begginge[287]."

[287] Owen and Blakeway, _History of Shrewsbury_, Vol. I. p. 400. Wheat
in Shrewsbury in May 1597 was 18_s._, rye 15_s._, beans 13_s._, while
in Sept. 1598 rye was 3_s._ 4_d._ and wheat 4_s._ 4_d._

It would appear that this kind of provision was usually made in
large towns, for one of the charges in a complaint brought against
two Newcastle aldermen was that of making no provision of corn for
the poor. The complaint was addressed to the Privy Council by the
discontented burgesses of the town of Newcastle and could hardly have
been made unless it were generally recognised that it was one of their
duties[288] to provide a store of this kind.

[288] _Cal. of State Papers_, May 31st, 1597. The Ipswich officials
were careful to provide for their needy neighbours. Every year from
1594 to 1597 loans were raised to buy corn, and it is always stated
that this corn was bought for the poor. In 1594 a loan of £200 was
so raised, and the town consented to bear any loss: the next year
£600 was thought necessary and three hundred quarters of rye were
purchased. On the 15th Oct. 1596, it was ordered that "100 quarters of
rye and 150 quarters of barley shall be bought for provision for the
poor and so much money as the same shall be valued at shall be lent
by the inhabitants of the town." Again, in 1597 three hundred combs
were provided at 4_s._ 6_d._ a bushel, and the charges for keeping it
and lading it were borne by the town. Nathaniel Bacon's _Annals of
Ipswich_, 25 Oct. 1594, 13 Oct. 1595, and 21 Feb. 1597.

How great the distress in Newcastle was at this time may be gathered
from the bare statements of the town accounts.

"Sept. 1597. Paide for the charges of buringe 9 poore folkes who died
for wante in the streets, for their graves making 3_s._

"Oct. 1597. Paid for the charge of buringe 16 poore folkes who died for
wante in the strettes 6_s._ 8_d._[289]."

[289] M. A. Richardson's _Tracts_, Vol. III. p. 44. See also Dec.
1596, "Paid for the charge of burying 7 poore folke which died in the
streete, for winding theme, grave making and carrying to the church
7_s._ 4_d._"

If a few people actually died of starvation many must have been nearly
starved.

All this indicates that the existing organisation for the relief of
the poor could not stand the strain of the continued distress of these
years. There were disturbances and complaints in many counties and a
disposition to lay the blame on the increase of enclosed land. The Dean
of Durham writes that the poverty of the country arises from decay of
tillage owing to the number of enclosures. The poor this year could
neither pay their landlords nor sow their corn, while many had to
travel sixty miles to buy bread[290].

[290] _Cal. of State Papers_, Jan. 1597, p. 347.

There was trouble too in making men obey the orders for the help of the
poor. Some were punished for ingrossing corn or for converting cottages
into tenements[291], while one man seems to have been rebellious
altogether: "They are knaves ... my goodes are my nowne," he said,
"they nor the queene nor the Councelle have to doe wi^{th} my goodes, I
will doe what I liste w^{th} them." The Court of Star Chamber sentenced
him to be fined £100, to be imprisoned, to wear papers, confessing his
fault and "to be bound for his good abearing[292]."

[291] _Les Reportes del Cases in Camera Stellata_, John Hawarde, ed. W.
P. Baildon, F.S.A., pp. 76 and 78. Among others Edward Framingham, then
High Constable of Norfolk, was brought before the Court "for converting
thirteen houses into cottages and tenements and reserving the land
for his own occupation and for ingrossing corn and buying and selling
the same out of market." He was sentenced to imprisonment, a fine of
£500, confession of his fault in Cheapside and Norfolk, to pay £40 to
the poor people, and to restore the houses with the land to husbandry
again. _Ib._ p. 76.

[292] _Ib._ p. 104.

From Dorset and Wilts we hear rumours of discontent[293], and
in Oxfordshire and Norfolk there were actual insurrections. The
Oxfordshire rebels themselves say that they rose because of the
sufferings of the poor and the high price of corn. Although Sir William
Spencer, one of the gentlemen who had enclosed land, reported that
the rebellion was not begun by the poorer sort of people, Lord Norris
wrote to the Council, "I want your commission and some order to be
taken about enclosures on the western part of the shire where this stir
began, that the poor may be able to live[294]." It is thus evident
that poverty had something to do with the insurrection. One of the
Norfolk rioters said he had heard that the poor were up in the west
country, and that four or five of his neighbours would go to a justice
of the peace and desire to have corn cheap; if they could not get it
reasonably they would arise and get it by force, and if they did arise
they would knock down the best first; "they stayed onlye butt for a
drum[295]."

[293] _Cal. of State Papers_, June 1597, p. 433.

[294] _Calendar of State Papers_, Dec. 14, 1596, p. 316.

[295] _Dom. State Papers Queen Eliz._, Vol. 262, No. 151.

A letter from a Somersetshire justice, Mr Edward Hext, to Cecil gives
a vivid picture of the disturbed state of Somerset. One hundred and
eighty-three persons were to be set at liberty from the Sessions in
the year 1596, "And of these very few came to any good; for none will
receive them into service. And, in truth, work they will not, neither
can they without most extreme pains, by reason their sinews are so
benumbed and stiff through idleness that as their limbs being put to
any hard labour, will grieve them above measure: so as they will rather
hazard their lives, than work. And this I know to be true: for at such
time as our Houses of Correction were up (which are put down in most
parts of England, the more pity) I sent divers wandering suspicious
persons to the House of Correction: and all in general would beseech
me to send them rather to the gaol. And denying it them some confessed
felony unto me; by which they hazarded their lives; to the end they
would not be sent to the House of Correction, where they should be
forced to work." He estimates that only the fifth person that commits a
felony was brought to trial, for "most commonly the most simple country
man and woman ... are of opinion that they would not procure any man's
death for all the goods in the world." He thought the Egyptians were
not so dangerous for there were only thirty or forty in the shire while
there were three or four hundred sturdy rogues[296]. Mr Hext wrote in
a time of famine when the poor were on the verge of starvation and
when the west part of the neighbouring county of Oxfordshire was in
insurrection.

[296] Strype's _Annals_, Vol. IV., p. 404 seq. Letter to Burghley from
Edw. Hext dated 25th Sept. 1596.

This letter thus confirms the inference we should draw from the
state of Oxfordshire, Norfolk, and Durham that on the whole the
organisation for the relief of the poor was still insufficient. The
public opinion of the time seems to recognise that there was a close
connection between the bands of vagrants and the recent enclosures.
Men like Lord Norris, the Dean of Durham, and Francis Bacon saw that
if the agricultural changes were ultimately good for everyone, in the
meantime they were bad for the poor; it was clear that many people had
been without sufficient food, and the many insurrections of the time
showed that this condition of things was dangerous to the peace of the
country. The distress of these years thus brought vividly before men of
the time the evils and the danger of the existing economic condition
of the very poor, and the resulting awakening of public opinion was
probably the chief factor in the creation of the better legislation and
more efficient administration of later years.

A pamphlet written in 1597 by Henry Arth gives us considerable insight
as to the contemporary ideas with regard to the relief of poverty, and
also as to the extent to which the law was executed at the time[297].
The writer makes a list of the various classes included under the term
"poor"; he uses the word to include those who require either relief
or coercion from the public. He mentions both "such as are yong and
lustie yet unwilling to labour," and "such as bee overcharged with
children having nothing to maintaine them but their hand labour." It
is in this sense that the word is most frequently used at the time.
Arth goes on to enumerate the causes of poverty, the sins of the
poor and the actions of the "poore makers." The poor were accused of
idleness, wasting their goods in "bibbing and belly cheare," discontent
and "seldome repairing to their parish churches to heare and learne
their duties better." The sins of the "poore makers" throw more light
on the economic changes of the time. Amongst these are mentioned
the "importable oppression of many landlords," the "unconscionable
extortion of all usurers," the "unsatiable covetousnesse in
cornemongers," "the discharging of seruants and apprentices," and the
"want of execution of good lawes and statutes." Magistrates fail to
execute the laws, ministers fail to admonish them, and so "the most do
live in disorder." But there are exceptions. The "strangers" in London
"may be a patterne in these respects to all our English nation," for
they keep all their fellow-countrymen from idleness and begging, and
find work and wages for their unemployed. If any of them become poor
"their state is imparted unto their company, and then commonly they
abstaine one meale on the next Lordes day and give the price thereof
towardes the parties maintenance." Moreover some well-disposed English
people did their duty in the matter. In some districts a man "shall
see not one begger asking any almes (except one or two that keepe
the common box according to the order) to take the benevolence of
trauellers and strangers so well are the statutes observed in those
places."

[297] "Provision for the poore now in penurie." Explained by H. A.
Printed by Thomas Creede 1597. A copy is in the British Museum.

Wakefield, where the writer lives, is one of these districts, "though
the poore be many and needy yet thus much I may speak to my knowledge
that if any be pinched with penurie the default especially resteth in
themselves though some other persons can not be excused. For, (to the
prayse of God bee it spoken) there is not onelie a house of correction
according to the lawe, but withall, certain stockes of money put forth
into honest clothiers' handes who are bounde with good sureties to set
all the poore to worke, after five pence or sixe pence a pound of wooll
spinning (as they shall deserve) if they will fetch it.

"For the impotent poore in every streete, they haue beene considered
of (by the most able and forwarde men of that towne) and a generall
ceassement voluntarie made for their supplie weekelie, which by
confirmation of her Maiesties justices is still kept of euerie able
householder, besides the Wednesdayes Suppers, for the which the
Church-wardens take paynes accordingly, wherein if euerie one woulde
discharge that dutie required of her Maiestie to let the poore haue the
full benefite of their sayde suppers, there should not one person haue
cause to begge there for all this deare yeare. As for the yonger sort,
fitte to learne trades and occupations there is order taken to put them
to apprentisshippe or otherwise to seruice."

From this pamphlet we see therefore that the law was sometimes well
executed in particular places although as a rule it was negligently
enforced. This view of the matter is confirmed by the rest of the
evidence concerning the period from 1569 to 1597. It is the period of
the growth of legislation and of the machinery of administration, but
the working together of the whole system was also locally successful.
At Reading, St Albans, Norwich, Leicester, York and Ipswich there
is abundant evidence to show that many steps were taken to relieve
the poor, while in Gloucester also we can see that increased action
was taken in this direction, and that the statute of 1572 was more
vigorously enforced than its predecessors. The City controlled the two
hospitals of St Bartholomew and of St Margaret[298] and the corporation
yearly elected a president, a treasurer, two surveyors, two almoners
and two scrutineers to look after them. For certain years the accounts
of Governor, Treasurer, Almoner and Scrutineer of St Bartholomew's
still exist[299]. Before 1569 the house of the White Friars had been
made into a House of Correction. For three parishes the accounts of
the collectors of the poor exist for the years 1572-3 and for five
other parishes for one or more of the succeeding ten years[300]. It
would thus seem that the statute of 1572 was put regularly in execution
in Gloucester and that this was the first statute that was thus
regularly enforced.

[298] Rudder's _Gloucestershire_, pp. 186, 202. Queen Elizabeth granted
the patronage of St Mary Magdalen also to the City on Dec. 4th, 41 Qu.
Eliz. p. 187.

[299] _Calendar of the Records of the Corporation of Gloucester._

No. 1335. 1569-70. Governor's account. Almoners and Governors exist as
early as 1558-9. No. 1327.

No. 1336. 1570-71. Almoner's account.

No. 1337. 1570-71. Treasurer's account.

No. 1339. 1570-71. Almoner's account.

No. 1340. 1573-74. Scrutinear's account, etc.

The Masters' accounts of St Margaret's are also preserved for the years
1556, 1560-1, 1561-2. _Ib._ p. 459.

[300] _Calendar of the Records of the Corporation of Gloucester._
Accounts of the Collectors for the poor.

  No. 1349. 1572-3. Parish of St Nicholas, St Mary de Lode and St Mary
                     de Crypt.

      1350. 1575-6. Parish of Holy Trinity.

      1352.    "        "     Graslane.

      1352.    "        "     St Michael.

      1353.    "        "     St Katherine.

      1355. 1576.       "     St Ewen, etc.

The only account of this kind before 1572 is an undated account of the
reign of Queen Elizabeth in a time of plague.

There is comparatively little evidence during the period of the
proceedings of justices of the peace in the country, but we have seen
that Mr Sands in Parliament and the justices themselves in their
report to the Privy Council tell us that in Worcestershire every man
was relieved at his own home. We have also seen that several Houses
of Correction had been established and that their value as part of
the organisation was recognised. It is thus clear that in many places
the local officials were being trained to their duties, and that the
statutes were really put in execution, not completely or everywhere,
but still to some extent and in many places[301].

[301] The effect of the years of scarcity in stimulating the vigour
of the justices is illustrated by a set of orders agreed upon by the
justices of the peace of Cornwall in April 1597. A copy was sent by Sir
Francis Godolphin to Sir Robert Cecil.

The orders first provide for a survey of all the poor which was to
distinguish between those who could earn part of their subsistence
and those who were altogether incapable and also for a list of the
householders who could contribute to their relief. The constables
and chief governors of the parish were to state whether they would
themselves undertake the relief of the parish or whether the justices
should levy a weekly rate for the purpose. After arrangements for
supporting the poor had thus been made beggars were to be severely
punished, fines for absence from church were to be rigorously exacted
and the fast of two meals weekly was to be carefully observed.
The orders further command an arrangement like that known as the
"roundsman" system for the unemployed: "Such poor as cannot provide
work for themselves are to present themselves in a convenient place in
the church on the Sabbath day a little before the ending of morning
and evening prayer and as soon as prayer is ended order shall be taken
to send them abroad among such householders as shall maintain them
meat, work and such wages as they can deserve for the week following"
(_Hatfield MSS._ VII. p. 161). These measures were taken before the
statute of 1597 was passed, and, in accordance with the statute of
1572, the justices and not the overseers were to make the rate. They
show an improvement in Cornish poor relief, not dependent on the
statute of 1597 but like the statute itself brought into existence by
the distress of the years of scarcity.

In Parliament legislative experiments were still tried, and many of
the men in Parliament, as justices of the peace or as members of the
Privy Council, were obtaining experience of the practical working of
the law. At the beginning of the period more stress was laid upon
repression than upon relief. But the events of the years of scarcity
brought home to the minds of most people the weakness occasioned by
the partial execution of the existing system. In most places it could
not stand the strain. The fact that the difficulties of the poor were
partly due to enclosures and not only to the idleness of the sturdy
vagrant was fully recognised. The danger of the distress of the poor
was also apparent: some rose in insurrection, many others, like the
Norfolk peasant, "stayed butt for a drum," all must have greatly
suffered. Consequently the whole question was re-opened, a statute
laying stress on relief was produced and a more efficient organisation
was made possible. A system of public poor relief could not be suddenly
established in a country like Elizabethan England. It had its basis in
the recognised local custom of parochial collections, and the growing
sense of municipal duty in the matter. Still, but for the development
of the action of the Privy Council, but for the growing experience of
members of Parliament, and but for the training of local officials and
of the general public during these years, probably the conception, and
certainly the execution, of the act of 1597 would have been impossible.




CHAPTER VIII.

PARLIAMENT AND THE PRIVY COUNCIL.

1597-1644.
  1. Characteristics of the period.
  2. Legislation from 1597 to 1644.

 Administrative machinery.
  3. Action of the Privy Council before 1629.
  4. Action of the Privy Council after 1629 with regard to the provision
of corn.
  5. Action of the Privy Council after 1629 with regard to the unemployed.
  6. The Book of Orders as a whole and the royal commission of 1630/1.
  7. Interference with wages as a method of helping the poor.
  8. Summary.


[Sidenote: 1. Characteristics of the period.]

The years between 1597 and 1644 are in many respects a unique period in
the history of English poor relief. A great deal of evidence exists,
which seems to indicate, that in many places during some of these years
the whole of the Elizabethan poor law was put in execution: that is,
work was provided for the unemployed as well as relief for the impotent.

After the Civil War a part only of the system survived. There are thus
grounds for believing that never since the days of Charles I. have
we had either so much provision of work for the able-bodied or so
complete a system of looking after the more needy classes when they
were suffering from the effects of fire, pestilence and famine. For
this reason alone the history of the poor at this period is especially
interesting, and it is also at this time that the history of the poor
is more directly connected than usual with the history of the nation as
a whole.

We will trace as in the preceding periods the history of legislation
and of the action of the Privy Council. But the relief of the poor is
a matter which can only be efficiently administered by men who have a
great knowledge of detail. The action of the Privy Council would have
had very little effect unless there had been an efficient system of
local government.

We will therefore examine the local machinery of administration as
well as the central and will see what kind of work was done by judges,
justices and overseers in regard to the relief of the poor. We shall
then know who did the duties with regard to relief now performed by the
Local Government Board, Boards of Guardians, magistrates, and relieving
officers.

We must then regard the system of poor relief from another point of
view and see what kind of relief could be obtained both in the country
and in the towns by the different classes of poor. This will include
the help afforded to the whole of the poorer population in years of
scarcity as well as the means that were taken in ordinary times to
pension the old, to train and maintain children, and to find work for
the unemployed.

Lastly we will endeavour to determine when and where the administrative
machinery was really set in motion and how far the relief afforded
to the different classes of poor was given all over the country. The
answer to these questions will enable us to see why it is that in
England poor laws were not only made but administered, while in some
other countries they were not administered even after they had been
made.

[Sidenote: 2. Legislation from 1597 to 1644.]

The work accomplished with regard to the poor by Parliament was
unimportant during the period from 1597 to 1644 but some slight changes
were made in the law. It was in 1601 that the statute on which our
system of poor relief has since rested was passed in its final form.
This law, known as the 43 Eliz. c. 2, is often regarded as inaugurating
new methods of dealing with the poor, but as a matter of fact few
important legal enactments have initiated fewer innovations. It is
simply a re-enactment with very slight alterations of the statute of
1597-8. The clause of the statute of 1597 which declared all beggars
to be rogues if they asked for anything more than food was omitted
in 1601, while the liability of parents to support their children,
imposed in 1597, was in 1601 extended to grandparents also. Otherwise
the slight differences between the two Acts consist chiefly of
modifications of detail, designed to render certain doubtful points of
law[302]. This statute of 1601 was itself only passed as a temporary
measure but it was continued by the Parliaments both of James I. and of
Charles I. It remained by far the most important regulation concerning
the relief of the poor until the Poor Law Amendment Act of 1834[303],
and is in force as the basis of our system of Poor Relief at the
present day.

[302] Other differences between the two Acts were as follows:

  1597-8.

  (1) Four Overseers were to be nominated
  yearly in Easter week.

  (2) Every inhabitant or occupier of
  lands in the parish was to be assessed.

  (3) People refusing to work were to
  be sent to the House of Correction.

  (4) A girl might be apprenticed
  until 21.

  (5) In 1597-8 the Mayors or Head
  Officers of Corporate Towns being
  justices of the peace had the same
  authority within their towns as justices
  of the peace in the country.

  (6) If a parish be in two counties
  or partly in a county and partly in a
  borough the justices or head officers
  of the towns were to "deal and intermeddle"
  only within their own "Liberty."


  1601.

  (1) Four, three or two Overseers
  were to be nominated according to the
  size of the parish in Easter week or
  within a month after Easter.

  (2) In 1601, the liability of the
  parish, vicar, owner of tithes impropriate
  and of saleable underwoods and
  of the occupiers of houses is specially
  mentioned.

  (3) In 1601 they might be sent to
  the House of Correction or gaol, probably
  because there was not yet everywhere
  a House of Correction.

  (4) If she married she was released
  at the time of her marriage.

  (5) In 1601, these powers were extended
  and the Town officials had not
  only the same authority as the justices
  out of their sessions and at their
  sessions, but the same power as was
  appointed "to any two or more of them
  or to the justices of the peace in their
  Quarter Sessions." Every Alderman
  of the City of London in his Ward
  had the same power as one or two
  justices in the county.

  (6) If the parish were in two counties
  or partly in a county and partly
  in a borough there were only the one
  set of Overseers, but the justices or
  Mayors &c. were to be responsible for
  the execution of the Act only within
  the part of the parish in their own
  counties or borough and the Overseers
  were to account to both.

  (7) In 1601 the penalty on justices
  for neglecting to nominate Overseers
  was fixed at £5.

  (8) A special order was made that
  the island of Foulness should be treated
  as a parish.

  (9) It was also provided that if an
  action for trespass should be brought
  against anyone acting in accordance
  with the provisions of the statute, it
  should be lawful for him to plead
  "Not Guilty" or to plead the authority
  of the Act. He was to be entitled to
  treble damages "by reason of his
  wrongfull vexacon."

Between the passing of these two Acts a series of resolutions was
circulated which related to the statute of 1597. These were attributed
to the judges and if they correctly stated the law several of the
new clauses of 1601 were already legally binding. Thus four of the
resolutions were as follows:

Res. 16. By this word parents is understoode a father or a grandfather,
mother or grandmother, being persons able.

Res. 17. Within the word children is included any childe, or
grandchilde, being able.

Res. 18. Parsons or Vicars &c. bee bound (as inhabitants) to the relief
of the poore as wel as others that inhabite within the parish.

Res. 19. Everie one that hath Tithes impropriate, coale mines or
lands in manuel occupation &c. is chargeable. And so for such as haue
saleable woods proportioning the same to an annual benefite.

W. Lambard, _Eirenarcha_, ed. 1599 after p. 206. See E. Cannan, _Hist.
of Local Rates_, p. 75.

[303] 4 and 5 Will. IV. c. 76 (1834).

In comparison with this statute all other legislation of the period on
the subject is of small importance, but several additions were made to
the law, and in four cases these contain provisions which supplement
the system of relief ordered by the principal enactment of 1601.
The first of these concerns maimed soldiers and was also passed in
1601[304]. The two former statutes on the subject, 35 Eliz. c. 4, and
39 Eliz. c. 21, were repealed, but the provisions of both of them were
practically re-enacted. A County Treasurer was to be elected who was
to pay pensions to those who had been wounded or maimed in the wars.
The money was to be raised by a county rate levied on the parishes
as formerly provided, but the amount that might be so raised was now
increased to an average of sixpence weekly from every parish with
a maximum of tenpence from the most highly rated parishes. Another
enactment relating to the relief of the poor was the 43 Eliz. c. 4.
This was likewise passed in 1601 and substantially re-enacts a statute
of 1597 (39 Eliz. c. 6). It provides for inquiries into breaches of
trust by means of writs directed by the Lord Chancellor to the bishop
of the diocese. The list given of the kinds of charity affected shows
how great and varied was the endowed almsgiving of the time. Some funds
had been assigned for "reliefe of aged impotent and poore people; some
for maintenance of sicke and maymed souldiers and marriners schooles
of learninge, free schooles and schollers in Universities; some for
repaire of bridges, portes, havens, causwaies, churches, sea bankes and
highwaies; some for educacon and prefermente of orphans; some for or
towardes reliefe, stocke or maintenance for howses of correccon; some
for mariages of poore maides; some for supportacon, ayde and helpe of
younge tradesmen, handicraftesmen and persons decayed; and others for
reliefe or redemption of prisoners or captives and for aide or ease of
any poore inhabitants concerninge paymente of fifteenes, settinge out
of souldiers and other taxes[305]." In both years in which the great
poor laws were passed, in 1597 and in 1601, a statute of this kind
was authorised. The fact indicates that Parliament desired to maintain
and strengthen the older voluntary system of charity in order that it
might work concurrently with the newer organisation now growing up. A
third measure relating to the relief of the poor was passed in 1603
and provided that a special rate might be levied for the sustenance of
those infected with plague; the rate in this case was to be levied,
not only from the parish but from the whole of the surrounding
district[306].

[304] 43 Eliz. c. 3. It is interesting to notice that this provision
for maimed soldiers was due to Sir Robert Cecil, Hatfield MSS. VII. p.
160.

[305] Bequests for some of the more unusual of these purposes occur
among the charities of Ipswich.

Thus in (1513) Jan. 14, the following entry is made: "Edm. Danby at
this Court declared that he had given to the Town lands and tenem^{ts}
in vallew 6^{li} p annu' to the end that they should discharge the
poore commonalty of the Towne of all dismes, quinziemes and charges
w^{ch} shall happen: the lands doe lye in Rushmere." Bacon's _Annals of
Ipswich_, p. 186.

Mr Henry Tooley, Portman of Ipswich, in a will dated Nov. 4, 1550
bequeathed:

  £100 to the repairing of Bone Bridge.
  £20 to the amending of the Haven.
  £100 towards repairing and amending certain highways.
  20_s._ to every maid who is fatherless and poor and shall marry within
Ipswich until £60 should be spent.

An Indenture of 1513 recites that a Mr Drayle left £70 in order to
release natives and foreigners from certain tolls &c. Ipswich, _Gifts
and Legacies_, pp. 1 and 168.

[306] 1 James I. c. 31.

But the fourth regulation of this kind is the most important. It was
passed in 1609-10 and concerned the building of Houses of Correction.
The Bill introduced on this subject in 1597 had been rejected after
much dispute and discussion and in its place the statute "on rogues"
had been hastily passed; this had repealed all the old regulations
concerning Houses of Correction and although it gave the justices the
power of levying a rate for the establishment of such institutions it
had not compelled them to use the power. The law therefore on this
point was much less exacting in its requirements than that which had
previously been in force. The new enactment of 1609-10 therefore
provided that one or more Houses of Correction must be erected within
every county. It is here laid down that these houses were to be used
to set "rogues or such other idle persons on worke," and no mention is
made of the deserving unemployed[307]. This therefore probably marks
the time when Houses of Correction ceased to be half workhouses and
became very much more like gaols.

[307] 7 James I. c. 4.

Thus while the law of 1601 is the basis on which relief was given
during the period, additional provision was made during the next ten
years for the assistance of maimed soldiers and of persons infected
with plague, and for the building of Houses of Correction[308].

[308] The following are other statutes concerning the relief of the
poor and passed during the period 1597 to 1644:

1 James I. c. 7. Removes the exemption of glassmen from the statute
of rogues. States that no licence by a nobleman shall exempt players
and provides for the branding and in certain cases for the death of
dangerous rogues.

1 James I. c. 25. Continues 43 Eliz. c. 2 and provides that masters may
retain the pauper apprentices whom the Overseers have bound to them.

7 James I. c. 3. Enacts various provisions with the object of securing
that funds which had been left to bind poor children apprentices shall
be properly employed.

21 James I. c. 1. States that the licence to erect "abiding or working
houses for the poor" is to continue for ever.

21 James I. c. 28. Continues 43 Eliz. c. 3, with addition of 1 Jac. I.
c. 25. Also continues 1 James I. c. 7, and 7 James I. c. 4, repeals 11
Hen. VII. c. 2, and 19 Hen. VII. c. 19, 12 Ric. II. cc. 3-9, and also
22 Hen. VIII. c. 12 and 3 and 4 Edw. VI. c. 16.

3 Chas. I. c. 5. Continues 43 Eliz. c. 2, and empowers Overseers to
set up any trade they will, provided it is only for the purpose of
employing the poor, notwithstanding any statute to the contrary. This
last enactment was probably designed to protect the Overseers from
penalties for violating the statute of apprenticeship.

Another series of statutes assigns the fines for their infraction to
the relief of the poor. Some of these are as follows:

1 Jac. I. c. 27, 7 Jac. I. c. 11, 21 Jac. I. c. 28, most of the fines
for the infraction of the game laws.

1 Jac. I. c. 9. Fines of alehouse keepers for allowing people to sit
tippling in their alehouses or for selling for a penny less than one
quart of best beer or two quarts of small.

4 Jac. I. c. 5. } Fine of 5_s._ for drunkenness or 3_s._ 4_d._ for
21 Jac. I. c. 7.} sitting drinking in an alehouse in one's own parish.

3 Jac. I. c. 4. Fine of one shilling for absence from church.

21 Jac. I. c. 18. Fines for breaking certain regulations for making
cloth.

21 Jac. I. c. 20. Fine for profane swearing, one shilling.

1 Car. I. c. 1. Fine for meeting for games outside one's own parish on
Sunday or in one's own parish for unlawful games.

3 Car. I. c. 2. Fine of 20_s._ for carriers driving on Sunday.
                  Fine of 6_s._ 8_d._ for butchers killing meat on Sunday.

Before leaving the statutes it is perhaps worth while to notice the
proviso that exists in so many of them in favour of John Dutton. The
lord of Dutton claimed jurisdiction over the minstrels of Cheshire. In
the reign of John, the Earl of Chester was imprisoned by the Welsh in
Rhuddlan Castle. He sent for aid to Roger de Lacy then the Constable
of Cheshire. It was the time of Chester fair. De Lacy collected a
multitude of the shoemakers, fiddlers and loiterers who were in the
town and with this force released the Earl. For this he obtained a
grant for himself and his heirs of jurisdiction over minstrels and over
disorderly characters in Cheshire. In 1216 this privilege was granted
by John de Lacy to Hugh Dutton and remained in the hands of the lords
of Dutton through the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. It was the
custom for the lord of Dutton to hold a Court at Chester on Midsummer
day and in 1498 he received from the whole body of minstrels four
flagons of wine and a lance with fourpence halfpenny from each of them.
A Court of this kind was held as late as 1756[309]. In nearly all the
statutes concerning vagabonds until that of 1822, the rights of John
Dutton's heirs were preserved, so that in the seventeenth century the
minstrels of Cheshire, licensed by the lord of Dutton, might wander
without fear of the penalty inflicted on wanderers elsewhere,--a
curious but direct consequence of an incident of border warfare in the
early part of the thirteenth century. Few facts illustrate better both
the continuity of English history and the toleration of anomalies by
English law than this perpetuation of the quaint jurisdiction of the
house of Dutton for more than six centuries.

[309] Lysons' _Cheshire_, p. 523 seq.

Some of the legal handbooks throw considerable light on the way in
which these statutes were interpreted. In the seventeenth century "The
Countrey Justice" was one of the most popular of these books. The
writer, Michael Dalton, defines the meaning of the term "poor." Like
Arth, he divides the poor into three kinds, "the poore by impotency and
defect," the "poore by casualty," and the "thriftlesse poore." This
classification was common at the time and dates back to the reign of
Edward VI. The "poore by impotency and defect" included the aged and
decrepit, the orphan child, lunatic, blind or lame people, or those
who were diseased. The term "poore by casualty" meant maimed people,
householders who had lost their property owing to loss from "fire,
water, robbery or suretiship, &c." and poor men "overcharged with
children." Among the "thriftlesse poore" were included "the riotous and
prodigall person that consumeth all with play or drinking," dissolute
and slothful people, those who wilfully spoil their work, and vagabonds
who will abide in no service or place. The "poore by impotency" were to
be provided with enough to sustain them properly; the poor by casualty
were to be "holden or set to work by the overseers," and further
relieved according to their need, but the thriftless poor were to go
to the House of Correction. None of these last, he says, are to have
relief from the town for that "were a meanes to nourish them in their
lewdnesse or idlenesse which take it, to rob others of releefe that
want it, to wrong those of their money that pay it, and to condemn them
of oversight which dispose it[310]."

[310] Michael Dalton, "The Countrey Justice," ed. 1635, p. 100.

So far the requirements of the law are similar to those of to-day,
but some of Dalton's instructions remind us of the difference between
the Elizabethan poor law and that of our own time. The poor law was
originally part of a paternal system of government: gentlemen were
ordered home to their estates, farmers were required to bring their
corn to market, cloth manufacturers had to carry on their trade under
well-defined regulations, and merchants were obliged to trade in the
manner which was thought to conduce most to the good order and to
the power of the nation. Workmen also were ordered to work whether
they liked it or not, and, if the law were enforced, had to accept
the wages fixed by the justices. Dalton therefore goes on to quote
another clause of the poor law which has long fallen into disuse. The
overseers were to set to work "all such persons (maried or unmaried) as
having no meanes to maintaine them, use no ordinary and daily trade of
life to get their living by[311]." If they refused the work appointed
them they were to go to the House of Correction. Moreover those who
refused to work for the wages commonly given and had not "lawfull
meanes to live by" were not to be sent to the parish where they were
legally settled but were to go to the House of Correction "upon
consideration had of both the statutes of the poore and rogues[312]."
Already any man between twelve and sixty who had not property and was
not a skilled workman might be compelled to serve in husbandry by
anyone who wanted a workman[313]. The poor law went a step farther.
Not only might an employer require an unemployed workman to work
for him but the overseers were obliged to see that he was employed.
Occasionally something seems to have been done to put this clause of
the statute into execution. Thus in a charge given to the overseers
of a division in 1623, these officials were ordered to give the names
of those refusing to work to the justices in order that the offenders
might be sent to the House of Correction. Moreover they were also
commanded "that uppon every Satturday at night or Sunday morninge they
fayle not to enquire and take knowledge what labour and work they"
(the workmen) "are provided of for the week followinge to the end that
if any be unprovided of work they may [therewith] be supplied by the
overseers who for that purpose are to enquire for worke for them and
to provide materialls for the men that are olde and weake and for the
women and children[314]." In other cases we hear of men being punished
for "living idly," and maintaining themselves "none knowes howe[315]";
and one of the regular items in the reports returned to the Book of
Orders of 1631 concerned the number who lived out of service[316].
The existence of this part of the law and its occasional enforcement
reminds us that the poor law once formed part of an economic system
entirely different from our own, in which not only paupers, but
everyone had to do what the government commanded on conditions settled
by authority.

[311] _Ibid._, p. 93. Dalton is here quoting almost exactly the words
of the statutes 39 Eliz. c. 3, 43 Eliz. c. 2.

[312] Resolutions of the judges, No. 10, Lambarde's _Eirenarcha_ (1599)
after p. 206. Dalton, p. 99. It is interesting to notice that a case
concerning the present law on this point has been recently before the
Courts. The Guardians of the poor in Merthyr Tydfil established labour
yards and relief works for the purpose of affording outdoor relief to
able-bodied persons during a strike. An action was brought by, and
on behalf of, the ratepayers of the district against the Guardians
asking for a declaration that the establishment of relief works for the
purpose of providing outdoor relief for able-bodied persons during a
strike was a breach of the Guardians' statutory rights and duties, and
also asking for an injunction to restrain the defendants from paying
for these relief works out of the common fund when there was plenty of
work to be had if the men would agree to accept the wages offered.

It was held by Lord Justice Romer that in any case of urgent necessity
an able-bodied man or his family ought to have such relief from the
Guardians as might be immediately required, even if the necessity had
arisen from the man wilfully refusing to work. But when the urgent
pressure was relieved, the Guardians ought to require the man to
work, and if he were able to get work and still refused they ought
to prosecute him under the Vagrancy Acts. It was also decided that
though the Court had jurisdiction in an action at the instance of the
ratepayers to restrain Guardians from applying the poor rates for
unauthorised purposes, still such an action should not be instituted
for the purpose of asking the Court whether the Guardians had been
right or wrong in granting relief in particular cases. The proper
course for the ratepayers to take when objecting to expenditure was to
go before the auditors appointed by the Local Government Board or to
appeal to the Local Government Board itself. In the present case no
instance of relief given except for urgent necessity had been proved
and no instances of improper relief had been brought before the Court.
The action therefore was dismissed. Attorney-General and others _v._
Merthyr Tydfil Guardians, March 27th, 1899. _Weekly Notes_, April 1st,
p. 38.

[313] 5 Eliz. c. 4. Anyone who was unmarried or under thirty even if he
had a skilled trade could be compelled to serve in that trade or all
artificers could be obliged to help in harvest.

[314] "A true copy of the charge given to the overseers of every towne
the 19th of December 1623," Tanner MSS., 73 II. § 390. The document
seems to relate to some particular division of a county which is not
mentioned.

[315] _Dom. State Papers_, Chas. I. Vol. 189, No. 66. See Chapter IX.

[316] Thus the overseers of "Idlestrey" (Elstree) report, "We have none
that live out of service ydlely or otherwise." See also "Questions
touching Labourers," Appendix XII. A. Cases of the enforcement of
regulations of this kind occur early in Elizabeth's reign at Norwich.
Thus in 1571 a certain Agnes Smith "is to be putt to service," "Meke's
wife and Garodes wife ar to be with the select weomen" and a certain
Suzan Brown if not hired for the whole year is "to goo to service," the
"Maiores Booke for the poore." Norwich MSS.

[Sidenote: 3. The action of the Privy Council before 1629.]

We will now turn to the administration of the law and we will first see
how this was influenced by the central government. This action of the
central government is important. In London, in Worcester and in Norwich
we have seen that the local administration was at one time successful,
but it tended to become slack when its original founders in county or
borough were followed by less vigorous successors. Without steady and
continuous pressure from a central authority on the local officials it
seems probable that in this period, as in the preceding century, the
laws concerning the poor would never have been energetically executed
in the greater part of England. It is this pressure that was supplied
by the increased activity of the Privy Council.

We will first examine a few instances of the Council's action before
1629, and we will then trace its policy from 1629 to 1644.

Between 1597 and 1629 the orders in Council and royal proclamations
do not differ greatly from those of the previous period; they still
enforce indirect measures for the relief of the poor by means of an
organisation for supplying the markets with corn and keeping the price
more uniform. After 1597 however the orders which relate also to the
ordinary relief of the poor by means of pensions for the old and work
for the unemployed became of greater relative importance, and during
the crisis of 1622-3 they were much better enforced.

Thus almost immediately after the passing of the poor law of 1597
efforts are made by the Council to secure its proper administration. On
April 5th, 1598, a letter is sent by the Council to the High Sheriff
and the justices of the peace in the several counties of England and
Wales. The writers do not doubt that the Judges of the Assize have
admonished the justices that special care must be taken to execute the
laws for the relief of poorer people and maimed soldiers as well as
the laws connected with vagabonds and tillage. "Nevertheless," they go
on to say, "consideringe the remisseness that hath bin used generally
by the justices of the peace in manie parts of the realm" they send
a letter themselves directly to the justices and order that care be
taken to see the new poor law "generally put into execution[317]." The
writers order the justices when they meet in Quarter Sessions after
Easter to take "speciall order amongst" themselves "for one strict
and uniform course to be houlden for the due observinge and puttinge
in execucon of the same lawes and statutes." They were also to meet
from time to time and make the under officers give an account of their
proceedings. This letter shows the Privy Council enforcing the whole
of the ordinary administration of relief by exactly the same means
that had formerly been used to enforce the measures concerning corn
and vagrants in 1572 and 1586. It is the first time in which this
interference seems primarily dictated by motives of humanity and not
mainly by a desire to maintain order.

[317] Privy Council Register, April 5th, 1598. With a note that it was
dated March 25th, 1598 "and stayed until this present." The records
of the proceedings of the Privy Council are to some extent preserved
in the Privy Council Register. This consists of an almost continuous
series of manuscripts preserved at the Privy Council Office. They are
now being printed but are still unpublished so far as the seventeenth
century is concerned. The volume containing the records from 1603 to
1612 is missing. The Register is by no means complete; only some of the
letters and proceedings of the Council are entered there.

Again in 1603 during a time of plague proclamations were issued
ordering the punishment of rogues, and the return of gentlemen to their
homes, in order that they might relieve the poor by their ordinary
hospitality and might take action for preventing the infection of the
plague[318].

[318] Little Proclamation Book, James I., No. 27 and No. 23.

In 1608 a series of measures concern the supply of grain to the
poor. In 1607 there had been serious disturbances in Northampton and
elsewhere on account of enclosures. The harvest in 1608 was bad and
the Council appear to have feared further disorder. They were careful
to issue a book of orders containing regulations similar to the orders
of 1587 and 1594. Two proclamations followed. The first commanded the
careful execution of the Book of Orders and the return of gentlemen to
their households[319]; the second prohibited the making of more malt
than was necessary "in order that the poor may have sufficient store
of barley to make bread for their sustenance at reasonable prices in
this time of scarcity of wheat and rye[320]." In 1608, however, the
price of barley was not much affected and the action of the Council was
discontinued.

[319] _Ib._, No. 88. This proclamation states that special orders had
already been issued for preventing and remedying the dearth of grain.
The orders are stated to command the punishment of engrossers &c., and
the prevention of the transportation of corn; the furnishing of the
markets rateably and weekly &c.

[320] _Ib._, No. 94. 12th Dec. 1608.

In 1621 to 1623 the sufferings of the poor were much more serious, and
the measures of the Council concerned both the supply of corn and the
direct relief of the poor.

As early as January 1619/20 a commission was drawn up for the due
execution of the laws for the relief of the poor in almost exactly
the same terms as that of January 1630/1[321]. Apparently the distress
was then due chiefly to the beginning of a crisis in the cloth trade,
for in May 1620 an inquiry was ordered into the decay of cloth-making
in Wiltshire[322]. During the three following years the poverty of the
poor increased.

[321] Drafts of this commission are in existence both in the British
Museum and Bodleian, and its issue was therefore contemplated, but
it does not follow that it was actually issued. Brit. Mus. MSS. No.
12,504, Tanner MSS. lxxv. 175.

[322] _Privy Council Register_, 12th May, 1620. The Merchant
Adventurers in reply said the vent of cloth was so little because so
many difficulties were thrown in the way of their sale of gold and
silver thread and the glass goods of the Levant.

The harvests of 1619 and 1620 had been exceptionally favourable, those
of 1621 and 1622 were unusually bad[323]. In Somerset four or five
hundred people assembled and took corn from those that carried it to
market, and in many other parts of the country there were similar
disturbances[324].

[323] The average prices given by Prof. Rogers are as follows:

                           1619                   1620              1621              1622

  Wheat per quarter  25_s._ 10½_d._      25_s._ 5_d._      40_s._ 9_d._      51_s._ 1_d._

  Barley "     "     14_s._ 11½_d._      11_s._ 4½_d._  21_s._ 2¾_d._  27_s._ 2¼_d._


[324] _Privy Council Register_, 8th Mar. 1622. In a letter from Locke
to Carleton it is stated that in the cloth-making counties the poor
have assembled in troops of forty and fifty and have gone to the houses
of the rich demanding meat and money; they had also taken provisions
which were for sale in the market. _Cal. of State Papers_, Feb. 16,
1622.

The Council adopted the usual methods; the Scarcity Book of Orders was
amended and reissued, and two proclamations were drawn up ordering the
restraint of maltsters and a reduction in the number of alehouses;
the proclamation of October, 1622, expressly states that this was
done because "barley is in time of scarcitie the bread-corne of the
poore[325]."

[325] Minute of the proclamation. _Dom. S. P._, Jac. I., Vol. 133, No.
52. The enforcement of the orders is again especially commended in
another proclamation issued on the 22nd Dec. 1622. _Large Proc. Bk._,
No. 109.

Besides this the special commands addressed to the country gentlemen
to return home were more emphatic than in former times, especially
at Christmas in 1622. Their presence was necessary for two reasons.
English gentlemen still kept great households and relieved many by
their hospitality, and they also were expected to maintain order
in their districts. They furnished information to the Government,
arranged measures of relief for the poor and, if necessary, quelled
and punished disorder. James I. had a great idea of their importance:
he is credited with the remark to the effect that a country gentleman
in town is like a ship at sea, which looks very small, while a country
gentleman in the country is like a ship in a river, which looks very
big. In 1622, therefore, two proclamations were issued ordering
gentlemen to return to the country.

In the earlier of these one of the reasons for the regulation is stated
to be because of "inconveniences which of necessity must ensue by the
absence of those out of their countries upon whose care a great and
principall part of the subordinate government of this realme doth
depend[326]." In the second the king expressed his pleasure that so
many had obeyed, and his displeasure with those who remained in London
because he was "perswaded that by this way of reviving the laudable
and ancient housekeeping of this realme the poore and such as are
most pinched in times of scarcity and want will be much releeved and
comforted[327]."

[326] _Large Proc. Bk._, No. 108, 20th Nov. 1622.

[327] _Ib._, No. 109.

From a letter written in 1622 we find that the country gentlemen were
by no means pleased at leaving the pleasures of Court; and "divers
lords and personages of qualitie," we are told, "have made meanes to
be dispensed w^{th}all for going into the countrie this Christmas
according to the proclamation but yt will not be graunted, so that they
packe away on all sides for feare of the worst, yet the L. Burghley
hath found favor in regard of his father's age and weakenes[328]." The
king was, however, firm in most cases, and not only issued the second
proclamation in Dec. 22nd, 1622, but by a third in March 1623[329],
continued the regulations, so that it is clear this measure was
considered important and was found successful.

[328] Letter of Chamberlain to Carleton, _Dom. S. P._, Vol. 134, No.
801.

[329] _Cal. of State Papers_, Mar. 26th, 1623.

But in 1622-3 the orders of the Council do not only provide for the
supply of the markets with corn. The poor were as much distressed by
want of work as by the high price of bread. For some years there had
been depression in the cloth trade, partly owing to the outbreak of
the Thirty Years' War, and partly to the small amount of coin which
was in circulation in England. In 1622 the Spanish ports also were
closed to English cloth. The merchants and manufacturers found that
heavy stocks were on their hands and ceased to employ the workmen. As
in 1527 and in 1586 the lords of the Council tried to remedy the evil
by forcing the employers to find work for their men. In Feb. 1621/22
they sent to the justices of ten of the clothmaking counties. They say
letters have been written to them setting forth the "decay of cloathing
and the great distresse thereby fallen upon the weavers, spinners and
ffullers in divers counties for want of worke." They recognise that
so great a trade cannot always proceed with equal profit, but upon it
the "livelihood of so many poore workmen and their families dependeth"
that they let the justices know that they have taken a course with
the merchants for the purchase of the cloths in the clothiers' hands,
and "we hereby require yo^u," they write, "to call before yo^u such
clothiers as yo^u shall thinke fitting and to deale effectually w^{th}
them for the imployment of such weavers, spinners and other persons as
are now out of worke. Where wee maye not omitt to let yo^u know that
as wee have imployed o^r best endeavo^{rs} in favo^r of the clothiers
both for the vent of their cloth and for moderation in the price of
wooll (of w^{ch} wee hope they shall speedily find the effects). Soe
may wee not indure that the cloathiers in that or any other countie
should att their pleasure and w^{th}out giving knowledge hereof unto
this Board, dismisse their workefoelkes, who being many in nomber and
most of them of the poorer sort are in such cases likely by their
clamo^{rs} to disturbe the quiet and governement of those parts
wherein they live. And if there shalbe found greater numbers of poore
people then the clothiers can reviue and imploy, Wee thinke it fitt
and accordingly require yo^u to take order for putting the statute in
execution, whereby there is provisione made in that behalfe by raising
of publicke stockes for the imployment of such in that trade as want
worke. Wherein if any clothier shall after sufficient warning refuse or
neglect to appeare before yo^u or otherwise shall obstinately denie to
yeeld to such overtures in this case as shalbe reasonable and iust,
yo^u shall take good bonds of them for refusing to appeare before us
and immediately certifie their names unto this board."

The Council also say the woolgrowers must sell their wool at a moderate
price, and finish up with the statement of the general principle on
which they act. "This being the rule," they say, "by w^{ch} both
the woolgrower, the cloathier and merchant must be governed. That
whosoever had a part of the gaine in profitable times since his Ma^{ty}
happie raigne must now in the decay of Trade ... beare a part of the
publicke losses as may best conduce to the good of the publicke and the
maintenance of the generall trade[330]."

[330] _Privy Council Register_, 9th Feb. 1621/2. The ten counties to
which this letter was sent are as follows:

  Wilts.,
  Somerset,
  Dorset,
  Devon,
  York,
  Gloucester,
  Worcester,
  Oxford,
  Kent,
  Suffolk.

This high-handed proceeding on the part of the Government might have
been successful if the slackness in trade had been of very short
duration. But in this case the crisis continued, and the employers were
soon in as bad a plight as their men. The Suffolk justices state that
in twelve towns out of two hundred the manufacturers have lost over
£30,000 by bankruptcies, and in twenty towns only have cloth unsold
worth £39,282. The employers cannot employ the men in clothmaking, but
the justices will do all they can to relieve the industrious poor[331].
The reply of the Gloucestershire justices is to much the same effect:
they add that the people begin to steal and many are starving. The
Judges of Assize also say they have interviewed the clothiers of
Gloucestershire, and have persuaded them to keep on their men for a
fortnight: they were utterly unable to do so for a month[332]. The
harvest of 1622 was again a failure and the distress increased. In
December the Council write to the justices of Suffolk and of Essex
concerning some "disquiet likely to happen ... amongst the poor sort of
people who wanting their usuall employm^t by reason of the badd vent
of new draperies w^{ch} gives them their onely meanes of maintenance
doe beginne to threaten unlawfull and disorderly courses to gett
reliefe." They request the justices to use their best endeavours to
maintain order and say that with "extraordinarie care" they have taken
a course for the relief of those suffering from extreme need. Early in
the year 1623 a series of relief measures were undertaken, possibly
in accordance with the "course" settled upon by the Council. Special
plans of selling corn to the poor under cost price were adopted, and
efforts were made to find work for the unemployed. We shall examine
the details of these reports later[333], and will now only notice that
they indicate a great improvement in the execution of the poor law;
they also record a good harvest for the early crops of 1623 and an
improvement in trade early in the year[334].

[331] _Cal. of State Papers_, April 28th, 1622, Vol. 128, No. 67; March
18th, 1622, Nos. 49 and 50. From Oxfordshire there is a like report.
The justices of Somerset state that the corn riots are now suppressed,
but that the want of work tends to mutiny. _Cal. of State Papers_, May
14th, 1622. The justices of Wilts reply that some of the clothiers
have dismissed their workpeople and there are now 8000 out of work;
some of them have attacked and seized corn on its way to market and
further outrages are feared. _Cal. of State Papers_, April 30th, 1622.
In consequence of this distress inquiry was ordered. A committee of
the Privy Council was appointed to find out the causes of the decay of
trade and to suggest remedies. Representative clothiers were to be sent
from every county to the Council, and the Merchant Adventurers were to
appoint some of their number to confer with the committee. In May it
was settled that if the Eastland merchants did not buy the cloths the
merchants might do so themselves, and in October an important committee
was appointed to consider the whole matter.

[332] _Privy Council Register_, 18th Dec. 1622.

[333] See Chapters XI., XII.

[334] Thus from Suffolk a whole series of reports record a vigilant
execution of the poor laws. In Hadleigh the justices say they have
done their best to set the poor to work (the "towne consisting onely
of clothinge"). At present (Mar. 18, 1622/3) and for a month past were
few shearmen, weavers, spinsters or other workfolk that could not have
sufficient work to employ themselves, but they do not know how long
this may continue ("the vent of cloth being so doubtfull"). _D. S. P._,
Jac. I., Vol. 142, No. 14, VI. In April we hear of the price of corn
abating. _D. S. P._, Jac. I., Vol. 143, No. 24.

This crisis of 1622 seems to mark a time of transition in the action
of the Privy Council with regard to the poor. The Orders in Council
were then more numerous and better enforced than those of any preceding
period, though they were only continued for a short space of time,
and seem to have ceased when the more pressing causes of disorder were
removed.

[Sidenote: 4. The action of the Privy Council after 1629 with regard to
the provision of corn.]

Between 1629 and 1644 the interference of the Council is not confined
to the years of scarcity but is continued for a long period of time.
There are every year important entries concerning the poor in the Privy
Council Register, and this fact seems to indicate that the attention
of the Privy Council was thoroughly aroused, and that there was a
determination to make the execution of the poor law a reality. The
years 1629 to 1631 like those of 1621 to 1623 were years of high-priced
corn and of a crisis in the cloth trade, and some of these Orders in
Council in 1629-31 are of the same character as those of 1622-3. In
1631 however the interference of the Council is better organised than
before and is continued until the outbreak of the Civil War. We will
first enumerate a few of the measures relating to grain.

The first proceeding of the Government was to forbid the transportation
of corn out of the country. In 1629 and 1631 proclamations were
issued to this effect[335]. In 1630 the export of beer also was
forbidden[336], so as to husband the barley as much as possible. The
restrictions were extended to Ireland, a survey was ordered of the
quantities of grain there, and it was found that there was a very good
harvest. Exportation to foreign countries was prohibited, licenses
already granted were revoked, and all corn not needed for Ireland was
to be brought to England[337].

[335] May 2nd, 1629, _Proc. Bk._, Chas. I., _D. S. P._, Vol. 541, p.
107. June 13th, 1631, Letters to Justices of England and Wales. _Privy
Council Register._

[336] _Privy Council Register_, Nov. 9th, 1630. Letter to the Lord
High Treasurer. "We understand ... yt the frequent exportacon of beere
beyond the seas doth ... increase the present dearth in the ... City.
We therefore require your lp. to give expresse order ... yt no beere be
caryed out of the kingdome."

[337] _Privy Council Reg._, 12th Nov. 1630, 9th June, 1630, 10th Sept.
1630.

At one time, moreover, an attempt was made to limit the export from
county to county and to regulate the supply by means of licenses.
Thus the bakers of London were to have the right of purchase for
twenty miles round the City; Bristol had special license to buy in
other markets and import by sea. Gloucester, Exeter, and London were
allowed to buy in Cornwall, Tewkesbury in Pembroke, Carmarthen and
Portsmouth in the Isle of Wight[338]. But this system of licensing
proved insufficient, and in April 1631 the justices of the home
counties received general orders to remember that the transport of corn
from one shire into another was not forbidden[339]. The Government
then recurred to the Books of Orders which were drawn up in 1587, and
had been re-enforced in every season of scarcity since that time. In
Sept. 1630 these orders were amended and reissued by Charles I.[340];
it is to this Book of Orders that the corn reports of the justices
refer[341]. These Orders we have seen work through the justices, and
require justices' reports. In fact they establish the organisation for
the provision of corn that was afterwards used for the relief of the
poor.

[338] _Privy Council Register_, 12th Nov. 1630, ff. 169, 181.

[339] _Ib._, April 2nd, f. 431.

[340] _Proc. Bk._, Chas. I., No. 134. _Privy Council Reg._, 9th Sept.
1630, f. 97.

[341] See Scarcity Reports of 1630, e.g. _Dom. S. P._ Chas. I., Vol.
176, Nos. 1, 18, 55, 57; Vol. 177, Nos. 31, 32, 43 etc.; Vol. 192, No.
19.

One other method of the central Government is perhaps worth noting.
Other laws connected with the poor were enforced, such as those
relating to the suppression of beggars and the labour laws. But these
times of famine were especially the times when inquiries were made
about enclosures. The enclosing of land necessarily excited opposition
when there was not corn enough. There were riots in Northampton and in
other places in 1607-8, and in 1631 "a large number of rebels" pulled
down fences in Braydon Forest[342]. A great inquiry was made into the
whole subject in 1609, and in 1631 also the justices return a few
special reports upon enclosures, and sometimes make their answer a part
of the report concerning the poor. In Appletree, Derby, very little
land had been lately enclosed "for that the greatest parte of this
hundred hath been enclosed long since[343]," but in other cases a few
new fences had been erected[344]. There is enough to show that even in
1631 enclosures continued to be made and continued to excite the old
opposition.

[342] _Cal. of State Papers_, June 10, 1631.

[343] _D. S. P._, Chas. I., Vol. 185, No. 41.

[344] _D. S. P._, Vol. 192, Nos. 24, 93, 94.

Thus the Council in 1629-30 endeavoured to minimise the amount of
grain consumed, to secure a proper supply for the markets, and to see
that all laws designed to benefit the poor were rigorously enforced.
These measures are of much the same character as those of the sixteenth
century, but the orders are much more detailed and much stronger in the
parts designed to secure efficient administration. They were better
administered, and in the reports sent in by the justices we can see a
marked improvement, and signs that the organisation which broke down in
the sixteenth century was successful in the seventeenth.

[Sidenote: 5. Action of the Privy Council after 1629 with regard to the
unemployed.]

But after 1629 the Orders of Council relate to many other methods of
relieving the poor. Some concern provision for the unemployed poor,
others deal with the Royal commission and Book of Orders of 1631, and
a few have reference to interference with wages undertaken by the
Government with the object of relieving distress.

The want of employment in the cloth-making counties again became a
serious difficulty at the beginning of the year 1629. It was partly
connected with political troubles; the merchants refused to pass their
goods through the Custom House in order to avoid paying exactions which
they regarded as illegal. The clothiers therefore could not sell their
cloths or continue to employ their workmen. Pressure on employers and
merchants was a not infrequent way of helping the poor. The Council
sent for the London merchants and thought they had persuaded them to
buy the unsold cloths[345], but apparently the merchants drew back;
in any case "divers merchant strangers and denizens" were summoned,
and on May 12th they are said to be "inclined" to buy the "bayes made
at Braintree, Bocking, and Coxall[346]." The privileges possessed by
the Merchant Adventurers for the export of cloth enabled the Council
to put especial pressure on the merchants when cloth was concerned.
The threat had only to be made that the trade would be thrown open
to foreign traders and the London merchants had to choose between
competition from rivals or the loss involved in buying the stocks
in the manufacturers' hands. In 1637 there was again depression in
the cloth trade, and again the Merchant Adventurers were told that
the trade would be thrown open if they did not buy the cloths[347].
Moreover one of the last acts connected with the poor enforced by
the personal government of Charles I. was of the same kind. At the
outbreak of the Civil War the clothing trade was the first to suffer,
clothmakers all over the country petitioned the king for help, and one
of the few resolutions of the Privy Council entered between 1640 and
1645 was that the cloth trade should be thrown open to relieve the
distress, and free license to export be allowed at those seaport towns
that remained faithful to the king[348].

[345] 10th May, 1629. _Privy Council Reg._ "The merchants have been
earnestly delt w^{th} ... to continue their wonted course in that
behalfe. And upon conference w^{th} the said marchants wee find them
inclined and plyable to his Mat'^s desire."

[346] _Privy Council Register_, 12th May, 1629.

[347] _Privy Council Register_, 26th April, 1637.

[348] _Ib._, 28th Feb., 1643/4.

[Sidenote: Relief of the unemployed cloth-workers.]

But this was only one of the methods in which the Council tried to
aid the makers of cloth. Special orders were sent to the justices of
Essex to cause adjoining parishes to help the districts where cloth
was made, because these parishes were more charged with poor than the
rest of the county[349]. Early in May, 1629, directions were given
to the Deputy-Lieutenants as well as to the justices of Essex and
Suffolk commanding them to see all possible measures were taken to
restore order and relieve the poor. It was especially stated that the
clothworkers were to be provided with work either in their own trade or
in some other good and honest labour, and if that were impossible they
were to be otherwise relieved[350].

[349] _Ib._, Entered 29th April, 1629.

[350] _Ib._, 5th May, 1629 f., No. 237.

Already the difficulty was not confined to the eastern counties, and
on May 17th, 1629, a proclamation was issued entitled, "A Proclamation
commanding the due execution of the Lawes made for setting the poore on
work." The regulations for "the reliefe of the indigent and impotent
poore, for binding out apprentices, for providing of stockes[351],
and for setting the poore on worke," were to be "duely and carefully
put in execution." The liability of the parish to provide funds, and
afterwards of the hundred and of the county is recapitulated, and
means are devised by which the duty may be performed. The "minister,
churchwardens and overseers for the poore" were straightway to meet and
take these matters into their consideration. They were then to report
to the justices of the peace. These latter were to consult together
in their several divisions, and at Quarter Sessions the necessary
arrangements were to be settled. The judges on their circuits were to
find out what had been done and were to make an exact report. Thus
the Central Authority set in motion the whole local machinery for
the execution of the poor law. The proclamation further ordered that
great care should be taken in those places where there either was or
should be any special occasion "to provide stocks to set the poor on
work[352]."

[351] The word "stockes" or stocks is here used in the sense of capital
for providing employment. We shall see that it was usual to raise a
lump sum of money for this purpose, almost always called the "stock" of
the parish. This was supposed to remain intact. Occasionally the word
stock was used for any capital sum possessed by the parish, but never
for the ordinary poor rates which were spent during the year.

[352] _Proclamation Book_, Chas. I., No. 109. Record Office, 17th May,
5 Chas. I.

[Sidenote: Special commands again to Suffolk and Essex.]

Some of the justices seem to have doubted whether they had legal power
to themselves levy a rate for providing employment for the poor. A few
days after the proclamation therefore a further letter is sent to the
Deputy-Lieutenants and justices of Essex and Suffolk stating that in
their part of the country there was special need for care in matters
concerning the poor, and therefore the writers again particularly
remind them of their duty and let them know "that it is the resolucon
of all the judges that by the lawe yo^u have sufficient power and ought
to raise meanes out of the severall parishes if they be of abilitie,
or otherwise in their defect in their severall hundrethes etc. to sett
the poore on worke and to relieve the aged and impotent not able to
worke[353]."

[353] _Privy Council Register_, 22nd May, 1629. See Appendix.

Another crisis of the same kind occurred in 1639 near the end of the
personal government of Charles I. The same methods are employed; it is
the western counties that are suffering most, and letters are written
to the justices of Devon and of Exeter urging them to make special
efforts to remove the more pressing necessities of the poor ordinarily
employed in the cloth trade[354].

[354] The Devonshire justices are told that people began to want
employment "w^{ch} in a short time may (if not prevented) breede
great inconveniences to the country." They in consultation with the
justices of Exeter were to "settle some good course whereby the poore
labouring people in generall may be provided of worke, and that in
particular those who more especially belong to the trade and busines of
cloathing." _Privy Council Register_, 13th April, 1639.

[Sidenote: Summary.]

Thus we see that during this period the Council put pressure on
merchants in order that manufacturers might give their men work; a
proclamation was drawn up by its advice giving strict orders for the
relief and employment of the poor all over the country; and it insisted
in several different ways that in the districts most affected work
should be found and relief given. We can see by the circumstances
of this crisis something of the nature of the difficulty which the
Stuart statesmen had to meet. The social organisation was based on the
assumption that the conditions were fairly stable; a poor man had the
greatest difficulty, as we have seen[355], in going from one part of
the country to another, and the apprenticeship laws were fitfully if
not rigorously enforced, so that, if a man's own trade failed, there
was little prospect of employment in another. In our own time a sudden
falling off in trade causes great hardship to the workmen, and in the
seventeenth century the hardship was thus far greater. The demand for
manufactured goods was essentially unstable; the social organisation
was based on an underlying assumption that work was stable. The
introduction of manufactures would therefore cause peculiar hardship to
the poor employed in them, if exceptional measures of this kind could
not be enforced.

[355] See Chap. VII.

There are several other references in the succeeding years which
refer chiefly or wholly to the action of the Council in enforcing
provision of work for the unemployed[356]. But after January 1631,
regulations of this kind formed part of the Book of Orders of that
date, and the Register of the Council, so far as it concerns the poor,
relates chiefly to the Royal commission, then just appointed, or to the
enforcement of the Book of Orders as a whole.

[356] 15th Feb., 1630/1. Rutland justices ordered to see the poor were
set to work. See Appendix.

31st March, 1631. Houses of Correction were to be erected in Herts.
without any more delay.

22nd April, 1631. J.P.'s of Middlesex and to those of Westminster.
Elsewhere much good had been done but they were negligent. Order them
to look after Houses of Correction and set vagabonds to work there.

31st March, 1631. Lord-Lieutenants commanded to see the poor were set
to work.

8th Jan., 1635-6. Several propositions for the employment of the poor
were referred to a committee, who were to give such order as was fit
for so good a work.

15th April, 1637. Inquiry into want of work at Godalming.

25th Aug. 1639. Inquiry into the grievances of the journeymen silk
weavers, who complain of slack work and lowered wages, f. 615. All
these are entered under their respective dates in the _Privy Council
Register_. We shall see when we consider the relief of the different
classes of poor in detail that there are evidences as to the result of
the Privy Council action on other occasions.

[Sidenote: 6. The Royal commission and Book of Orders as a whole.]

As early as June, 1630, a special committee of the Council itself had
been appointed commissioners for the poor[357], but in January in the
next year a further step was taken and a commission was issued to the
chief people in the country. The minutes of a few of its meetings
have been preserved, but these relate mainly to an inquiry into the
administration of Mr Kendrick's charity at Reading[358]. Its influence
seems to have been very considerable, but to have been exerted not so
much through the proceedings of the commission as a whole as through
the appointment of local committees, and through the delegation of its
powers for administrative purposes to various sub-committees. It had
the power to ask for the appointment of local commissions, and it was
in this way that it could most effectively deal with abuses in any
particular district. Thus if there was a complaint of great distress
or if charitable funds were not properly applied, a local commission
was suggested. Such commissions were granted for Bury, Exeter,
Colchester, for the parishes in and about London, and for Stamford in
county Lincoln[359], and would be a terror to evildoers in matters of
charitable endowments.

[357] In June 1630 the following Privy Councillors were appointed
"Commissioners for the Poore."

  Lord Privy Seal.
  Earl Marshall.
  Earl of Bridgwater.
  Earl of Danby.
  Lord Viscount Wimbledon.
  Lord Viscount Dorchester.
  Lord Viscount Falkland.
  Mr Trer.
  Mr Vic. Chamb.
  Mr Secre. Coke, "or anie foure of them."

The petition of Viscount Wimbledon is referred to them on 12th Nov.,
1630.

[358] _Dom. State Papers_, Chas. I., Vol. 213, dated Jan. 1631. This
volume is said to contain the minutes of the proceedings of the
Commissioners of the Poor, but after a few pages there are few entries
relating to the poor at all. There was an inquiry into the hospitals of
London and into Kenrick's charity at Reading, but little besides.

[359] _Privy Council Register_, Commissions for Exeter and Colchester
were issued 29th Feb., 1631/2, for Stamford 2nd July, 1632, f. 127,
for the London parishes 31st May, 1632. One for Bury had been issued
before 29th Feb. 1631/2, and further complaints were referred to its
members. All these commissions are stated to be issued in accordance
with the commission of the 5th Jan. 1630/1 for putting in execution the
"lawes for the reliefes of the poore," which authorised the granting of
commissions for inquiry into charitable trusts at the request of six of
the commissioners.

But the commissioners not only delegated their powers by means of local
commissions. For administrative purposes they divided themselves into
groups, each consisting of six or seven commissioners. One of these
sub-committees was attached to the counties of each circuit. Thus
Wentworth was amongst those especially responsible for the Northern
Circuit; Laud and Coke were assigned to that of Lincoln; Dorchester,
Falkland and Bridgwater to the district round Shropshire; Abbot, the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and Wimbledon to Kent; the Earl of Holland to
Norfolk, and the Chancellor of the Exchequer to the west country[360].
This division would immensely increase the administrative usefulness
of the commissioners and was adopted immediately before the issue of
the Book of Orders. It was therefore most probably connected with the
system then established, and designed to enable the commissioners to
bring their influence to bear on the judges, and through them on every
justice in the county.

[360] Addit. MSS. British Museum, No. 12496, f. 282. This document
states that the commissioners were assigned to particular districts
in order that the business of the several counties might be more
thoroughly investigated. The distribution was made according to
circuits because the judges of each circuit were to receive the
justices' reports from the district and then to account to the
commissioners.

The Book of Orders was issued in January 1630/1. It is the most
important of the measures connected with the poor enforced by the
Privy Council. It was not the only document of the kind. We have seen
that a Book of Orders for the prevention of scarcity was issued in the
time of Queen Elizabeth, and was amended and re-issued in the reigns
of James and Charles. This method of issuing a Book of Orders was now
adopted for the relief of the poor at all times and not only in years
of scarcity.

The Orders begin by stating that many excellent laws were in existence
both for the relief of the poor and for the proper employment of
charitable endowments; these for a short time after the making of
the laws were duly executed, and that in some parts of the kingdom
"where some justices of the peace and other magistrates doe duely
and diligently execute the same, there evidently appeareth great
reformation, benefit, and safety to redound to the Commonwealth."
But they also inform us that in other parts of the realm there was
now great neglect, and that these orders were therefore necessary.
The orders and the directions were given separately; the directions
order the enforcement of the regulations of the statutes such as those
for the repression of beggary, the binding of apprentices, and the
provision of both work and relief. They especially command energy in
the matter within the jurisdictions of lords and at the Courts leet.
Only two of them impose new regulations. One orders that the Correction
houses in all counties should be made next to the gaol; the other has
especial reference to the time of scarcity; rates were to be raised
in every parish, and contributions were to be given by the richer
parishes to help the poorer ones, "especially from those places where
depopulations have beene, some good contribution to come for helpe of
other parishes."

Eight Orders precede the directions; they prescribe the method
of administration rather than what was to be administered, and it
was this that was most important. The justices of every shire were
to divide themselves so that certain of them were responsible for
particular hundreds. They were to hold monthly meetings and to meet
the constables, churchwardens, and overseers. From these they were
to inquire what measures they had taken in every parish and to hear
who were the offenders against the laws. The justices were to punish
neglect, and were themselves to report every three months to the
sheriff. The reports were to be sent on to the Judges of Assize, and
from them to the Lords Commissioners, some of whom, as we have seen,
were especially responsible for every circuit. The Judges of Assize
were particularly to inquire which justices were negligent[361] and to
make a report to the king.

[361] Addit. MSS. 12496, f. 243. The Orders and Directions, but not the
preamble, are printed by Eden. _State of the Poor_, Vol. i., p. 156.

It is not difficult to see that these Orders would greatly help the
general administration of the law. Some trouble was found in executing
them, but the Book of Orders formed the basis of the organisation for
the relief of the poor for the years between 1631 and 1640. In April,
1632, we are told that much good has been done, but there are now
signs of slackness. All the justices are to do their best and to make
certificates to the judges[362]. In October 1633 the returns had not
been so well made, and the judges were asked to find out what justices
were remiss[363]. In May 1635 a letter was sent to the judges stating
that many times they had received charge to see the Book of Orders put
in execution. Still in most places the justices have been exceedingly
negligent, and the judges are ordered to insist on their doing their
work and returning their certificates[364]. The effect of the Book
of Orders we shall be more easily able to estimate later, but we can
see from the entries made in these minutes of the Council itself how
energetically its members tried to see that their directions were
enforced.

[362] A minute of letters directed to "y^r high Sheriffe of y^e
severall countyes of England and Wales," _Privy Council Register_,
April 30th, 1632.

[363] _Privy Council Register_, 16th Oct., 1633.

[364] _Ib._, 7th May, 1635.

Many regulations were made about particular places in time of plague,
but to some extent this had been done in the reign of Elizabeth and
it is not a new development in the policy of the Council. It will be
sufficient to notice that frequent resolutions were passed on the
subject, particularly in 1636, 1637, and 1638, and that many of these
decisions take for granted a fairly efficient organisation for the
relief of the poor in ordinary times[365]. We shall have to consider
these measures more in detail when we examine the provision made for
the poor in time of sickness.[366]

[365] Thus on 25 Sept. 1636, a collection is ordered in the cities of
London and Westminster and in the counties of Middlesex and Surrey for
those affected with plague.

[366] On 30th May the Council order a collection for those stricken
with plague in Hadleigh, and also for the poor clothworkers who are out
of work and have no means of subsistence. Like collections were made
for Northampton 10th May, 1638, and for Gloucester 16th May, 1638, &c.
_Privy Council Register._

[Sidenote: 7. Interference of the Council with wages.]

There are also several examples of the interference of the Council
with wages with the object of relieving the poor. We have seen that in
1629 the cloth trade was depressed, and that the Lords of the Council
endeavoured to insist that work and relief should be provided for the
workmen out of employment. At the same time they also made efforts on
behalf of those who were still employed. In July, 1629, they wrote to
the Earl of Warwick and justices of Essex concerning the weavers of
baize in the neighbourhood of Bocking and Braintree. Wages were already
low, and the men hardly able to live by their labour, yet the employers
were trying to force their workmen to make a greater length of cloth
for the same wages. "Wee thinke it very fit and just," write the
members of the Council, "that they (the weavers) should receive such
payment for their worke as in reason ought to be given according to the
proportion thereof and also that the said Bayes which are woven in the
saide countie are to be made of one length[367]."

[367] _Privy Council Register_, 3rd July, 1629, Vol. 5, f. 399.

In February, 1631, the weavers of Sudbury complained; a petition to the
Council was presented on behalf of Sylva Harbert and others, saying the
"poore spinsters, weavers and combers of wooll" were "much abridged of
their former and usuall wages" by the clothiers, "who are now growne
rich by the labours of the said poore people." The matter was referred
to a committee with instructions to cause "orderly payment" to be made
of the "due and accustomed wages.... And in case any particular person
shalbe found either out of the hardnes of his harte towards the poore
or out of private end or humo^r refractory to such courses as the said
com^{rs} shall thinke reasonable and iust" he shall be ordered to
appear before the board[368].

[368] _Privy Council Register_, 16th Feb., 1630/1.

The employers stated that all of the trade had reduced wages, but that,
if a general rule were made binding on all the employers, they would be
willing to agree to give any wages which were thought reasonable[369].
A rate was fixed by an Order in Council, but the decision was not
obeyed. Lawsuits were brought by clothier against clothier, until
another attempt was made to settle the matter, and in 1636 Charles I.
issued Letters Patent fixing the length of the reel and ordering that
the wages of all the workpeople should be raised in proportion[370].

[369] _Cal. of State Papers_, 27th April, 1631, p. 22.

[370] Rymer, XX. 41.

It is evident, then, that in 1629 the masters of Braintree and Booking
were trying to take advantage of the competition of their workmen to
force down wages, and that in this particular trade both then and
afterwards the Council tried to prevent anything of the kind being done.

A bad harvest in 1629, followed by a worse in 1630, plunged not only
the clothworkers but the whole labouring class into distress. Amongst
many other measures calculated to relieve this scarcity the Council
again interfered with wages in order to aid the whole body of workmen.

Wages had been legally fixed by law in various ways since the middle
of the fourteenth century, and in 1563 it had been provided that
the justices of the peace should every year fix the scale of wages
according to the prices of food, and other conditions of the workmen.
It has been generally considered that these assessments were either
ineffectual or were enforced in the interest of the employers and not
that of the employed. But on September 29th, 1630, the Council ordered
four letters to be written, directed to the justices of the peace
of Cambridge, Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex, and to the mayor of Norwich,
the contents of which clearly show that in this instance the Council
interfered with the object of helping the poor. The people themselves
had complained that the rates had not been properly made for them
according to law; the Council thereupon write down to the justices and
say that "these hard and necessitus tymes doe require some better care
to be had in that behalfe; we have therefore thought good at this time
to recommend the same to yo^r extraordinarie care. For the statutes
of 5 Eliz. and 1 Jac. having so carefully provided against these
inconveniences, it were a great shame if for want of due care in such
as are speciallie trusted with the execution of these lawes, the poore
should be pinched in theise times of scarcitie and dearth. And his
Mat^{ie} and this Board cannot but be exceeding sensible of any neglect
or omission which may occasion such evill effects, as are like to ensue
thereupon. And therefore since neither you nor any other can pretend
any want of legall power to have prevented all just cause of complainte
in this kinde wee doe hereby in his Mat^{ies} name will and require you
to use such care and diligence that his Mat^{ie} and this Board may
not be troubled with any complaint for want of due execution of the
aforesaid statute. And so etc.[371]"

[371] The text of the document and the substance of these paragraphs
have already appeared in _The English Historical Review_, January,
1898, p. 91.

The fact that the men complained and that the Council so promptly
interfered in this matter is a strong argument that both the workmen
and the members of the Council believed that the assessments were
enforced, or at least that they had a great influence on the wages
actually paid. The occurrence certainly shows us that in this instance
the assessments were ordered to be made in the interests not of the
masters but of the men, and that it was the intention of the Government
to protect the men from oppression. It suggests that the justices were
negligent, but it brings into prominence the fact that the justices
were supervised by the Privy Council.

There is reason for believing that the determination here shown by
the Council to help the poor had considerable weight in inducing the
justices to make the wages assessments of the time. It was probably an
immediate consequence of this letter that the Norwich justices drew
up a new assessment, and reported the fact to the Council in Dec.
1630[372]. Moreover a very large proportion of the other assessments
which have been preserved of the reigns of James and Charles belong
to the years of scarcity, when the relief of the poor was the main
object of the justices[373]. As money wages were rising throughout the
century, new assessments were always in favour of the workman and would
become most necessary in times when the price of food was high; they
would also most readily be made when the necessities of the poor were
great.

[372] _Dom. State Papers_, Chas. I., Vol. 176, No. 1, 1st Dec. 1630.
"And we have accordinge to the Statute appointed the wages of servants,
laborers and workemen at such Rates as will conveniently recompence
their paynes and yeld unto them competent maintenaunce."

[373] Wages assessments have been printed for Bury St Edmunds in
1630 (_The English Historical Review_, April 1897); for St Albans in
1631 (A. E. Gibbs, _Corporation Records of St Albans_, p. 281); for
Gloucester in 1632 (Thorold Rogers _History of Agriculture and Prices_,
Vol. VI., p. 694). One also exists for Hertford made in 1631, _Hist.
Man. Com. R._ XIV., App. viii., p. 160.

It is perhaps worth while to notice one other instance of protection
given to workmen by the Privy Council. During another time of trade
depression, in the year 1637, Thomas Reignolds, manufacturer, made
his workmen accept cloth instead of money for their wages. The men
complained; the Council found it was a second offence and ordered
Thomas Reignolds to be sent to the Fleet until he had paid his workmen
double the amount they had lost, and their charges for bringing the
complaint besides[374]. The punishment for truck inflicted by the Privy
Council during the personal government of Charles I. was certainly
severe.

[374] _Privy Council Register_, 10th May, 1637. On 17th May an order
was made for the release of Thomas Reignolds as he had then given the
weavers full satisfaction.

[Sidenote: 8. Summary.]

Thus in the period from 1597 to 1644 the Privy Council are increasingly
active on behalf of the poor, and during eleven of these years, from
1629 to 1640, they adopt a policy of constantly exerting influence to
secure the proper administration of the poor laws. This continuous
policy seems to be suggested by the exceptional measures which had
formerly been adopted in years of scarcity. In every season of
high-price corn since 1527 some action of this kind was taken, and
every exceptionally bad time of distress increased the extent of
governmental interference. The continuous policy adopted between 1629
and 1640 began with a failure of harvest and crisis in the cloth trade,
and the earlier methods of the Government were like those of 1597
and 1622. But while the season of scarcity still continued the Privy
Council issued the Book of Orders for the relief of the poor, and the
organisation begun by these commands was continued throughout the
period of personal government.

Abbot and Laud, Wentworth and Falkland, Dorchester and Wimbledon are
the members of the Privy Council whose names are most closely connected
with this policy. Its effects and success we shall be better able
to estimate later, but we can already see that the system which the
Privy Council tried to enforce was considerably more extensive than
any organisation of poor relief with which we are familiar. Already we
know that the poor were not only looked after in times of bad harvests,
as in the sixteenth century, but they were also sometimes employed
when they were out of work, and that, not only when an individual was
unfortunate, but when whole classes were suffering from a fluctuation
in trade. This certainly could not always be carried out, but the
Council insisted that it should be attempted. The personal government
of Charles I. has been more associated with the exaction of Ship
Money than with attempts to enforce a system which has much in common
with the socialistic schemes with which we are familiar on paper, and
yet these eleven years are remarkable for more continuous efforts
to enforce socialistic measures than has been made by the central
Government of any other great European country. Apart from its success
or failure the attempt is interesting, because it shows us the ideal of
government which was in the minds of Charles I. and his advisers, and
reminds us that these infringers of individual liberties were also, in
intention at least, the protectors of the poor.




CHAPTER IX.

1597-1644.

THE LOCAL MACHINERY FOR ADMINISTRATION.

  1. Powers of the justices.
  2. Work of the justices in first putting the law in execution.
    (_a_) In West Riding in 1598.
    (_b_) In North Riding from 1605 onwards.
  3. Reports of the justices in response to the Book of Orders.
  4. The work of the judges.
    (_a_) Authoritative decisions on points of law.
    (_b_) Administrative work as the link between the Privy Council and the justices.
  5. The work of the overseers.
    (_a_) In 1599.
    (_b_) When stirred to greater activity by scarcity measures.
    (_c_) After the issue of the Book of Orders.


The increased activity of the Privy Council, which made the poor
law of the seventeenth century more effective than that of the
sixteenth, depended for its success upon the activity of the local
officials, particularly of the justices of the peace and the municipal
authorities. We will now therefore examine the work done (1) by the
justices and town rulers, (2) by the judges[375], and (3) by the
overseers.

[375] Although the judges were not strictly speaking local authorities
so much of their work with regard to the poor law was done locally that
it seems more convenient to consider them in this connection.

[Sidenote: 1. Powers of the justices.]

We have seen, in the Elizabethan organisation of Norwich, how much the
justices and municipal officers could do when they were at their best,
but preambles, proclamations, and letters of the Privy Council combine
to tell us that continuous vigour and energy were exceptional. Still
the important point is that this local government existed, and under
pressure could become effective. It was because the organisation was
there that the letters of the Privy Council were so important; if the
justices had been powerless officials, Privy Council letters would have
been useless. It is because the justices had the power and could be
effective, that it is necessary for us to see how far the Privy Council
measures stirred them into action.

The Chancellor's charge in 1608 to the justices and judges throws some
light on the social position and importance of the justices, and also
shows that the Government thought it very necessary that their work
should be well done. The Chancellor complained that the justices who
did the work could have no place on the bench, and could hardly get
into the court "for the number of newe and younge knightes, that come
in there braueryes and stande there lyke an Idoll to be gazed vpon
and doe nothinge, ys so greate and pressinge for place countenaunce
and estimacyon." These young justices are reminded that "they are not
Justices for their countenaunce onelye." They and the other justices
are exhorted to "remember there oathes and dutyes that they are
for the Justice, peace and gouernemente of the cuntrye." They were
especially commanded to prevent vagrants from wandering; to see that
the proclamation and letters "for corne busynes" were enforced, and
that "y^e poore be prouyded for w^{th}in there paryshes." They were
also told that it was their duty to prevent all riotous assemblies at
the beginning, and that if there were disturbances they would be held
responsible[376]. This speech shows us that the Government thought
the peace of the country depended mainly upon the vigilance of the
justices, and that the office of justice of the peace was much coveted
because of the influence and respect it gave its possessor.

[376] _Les Reportes del Cases in Camera Stellata_, John Hawarde, ed. W.
P. Baildon, p. 367-8.

[Sidenote: Powers of the justices under the Statutes.]

Under the provisions of the poor laws the justices had some duties for
the performance of which they were directly responsible, and others
in which they had to supervise the overseers and the constables. They
were directly responsible for the relief of maimed soldiers, for the
maintenance of Houses of Correction and for contributions to prisoners
and to such county hospitals as were in existence. They were further
the authorities who made the special assessments in time of plague and
levied the rates in aid of poorer parishes. To them were also referred
questions of settlement and other matters which concerned several
parishes. Moreover, although the overseers were primarily responsible
for setting the able-bodied poor to work, the justices sometimes levied
county rates for this purpose, and occasionally ordered that particular
people should be relieved from county funds.

But the hardest part of their duty in this matter consisted in the
proper supervision of the overseers. The names of the poor of each
parish had to be presented to them, and the assessments sanctioned by
them; it was their duty to examine the overseers' accounts and to see
that the pauper children were bound apprentices. Moreover, they had to
punish negligent officials, to coerce unwilling contributors, and to
listen to the appeals of aggrieved persons, whether they were injured
ratepayers or unrelieved poor.

[Sidenote: 2. Work of justices in first putting the law in execution.]

[Sidenote: (_a_) In the West Riding in 1598.]

The orders of the West Riding Sessions Rolls during 1598[377] give
us some idea of the difficulties of the justices in putting the
system into execution. The statute of 1597-8 was apparently the
first regulation of the kind generally administered in the West
Riding, but efforts were made to enforce this as soon as it came into
operation[378]. In June 1598 elaborate orders were drawn up for the
division of Knaresborough, which show us that the new methods met with
considerable opposition. The churchwardens and overseers presented the
names of the poor, but they said that all the parishes objected to pay
money. The inhabitants preferred to give "releefe" to beggars, and
some, they said, could help in this way who could not afford to pay
rates. The justices allowed the parishioners to have their own way to
some extent. They stipulated, however, that the poor should ask relief
of their fellow parishioners only, and that those who were able to
work should be set to work. Moreover, the occupiers who lived out of
the parish and the inhabitants who refused to give sufficiently were
to be assessed[379]. It was not only in Knaresborough that poor rates
were unpopular. Seven inhabitants of Tickhill refused to give the sum
assessed on them[380], while in Bentley and Arkesey an assessment was
duly made, but the money was not paid until the goods of many of the
inhabitants had been distrained[381].

[377] The _West Riding Sessions Rolls_ have been printed from 10th
Jan. 1597-8 to the 1st July, 1602, inclusive. The Roll for the year
1598 contains the orders made at the Sessions as well as the panels
and indictments, _West Riding Sessions Rolls_, Vol. III., Yorkshire
Archæological Association.

[378] April, 1598. "Ordered that the churchwardens and surveiors of
the poore within the parishe of Braiton shall see and take order that
Elizabethe Corker and her iiij^{or} children shalbe releeved and
provided for as the late statute requireth etc." _West Riding Sessions
Rolls_, p. 76.

[379] _West Riding Sessions Rolls_, pp. 84-86, June, 1598.

[380] _Ib._ p. 94.

[381] _Ib._ p. 97. The churchwardens and overseers of Wakefield in some
way failed to comply with the statute, although according to Arth's
pamphlet the poor there were sufficiently relieved. _Ib._ p. 118. See
Chap. VIII. _supra_.

This enforcement of local responsibility at first increased rather than
lessened the hardships endured by many of the poor. We are told that
"divers personnes are nowe sent forth of all partes of this realme to
the places of their births; wherof some of those personnes so sent have
bene inhabitinge and dwellinge in those places and townes from whence
they are sent by the space of twentie yeares, some more, some lesse."

This was done by the parochial officials in order that their own parish
might not be forced to support these poor people. They endeavoured
to shift the burden to the parish where the people were born, or to
get them sent as rogues to the House of Correction, where they would
be supported by the county. The justices of the West Riding tried to
prevent this unjust practice. No poor of the Knaresborough division
were to be sent to the place of their birth without special order from
some neighbouring justice of the peace. Moreover, the testimonials of
the poor passing through the division were to be examined, and when the
bearers were found to have lived more than three years in the parish
from which they were sent they were to return again. "For," say the
justices, "such kynde of personnes ... are not rooges nor wanderinge
beggers within the meanyng of the statute, but ought to be releived as
the poore of the parishe wher they so inhabited and wher they wrought
when they were able to worke[382]."

[382] _West Riding Sessions Rolls_, pp. 84, 85. Knaresborough Orders.

The Mayor of Doncaster seems to have been an offender in this respect;
a poor man named Gregorie Shawe had lived in Doncaster twenty years and
was in the Hospital, but he had been turned out and sent away. _Ib._
XXXI. p. 105.

The refusal of the inhabitants to pay rates and this illegal way in
which the parochial authorities attempted to get rid of the poor they
were now forced to maintain indicates that the first enforcement of
the new poor law caused considerable dissatisfaction[383]. These
difficulties bear out the conclusion that no earlier poor law had been
adequately put in force in this district. Now, however, the justices
insisted that more should be done, and occasionally they seem to have
been successful[384].

[383] Sometimes a parish was disobedient even when an order for relief
was made by the justices. Thus the parish of Silkston had been ordered
to pay vi^d weekly to John Michell of Gunthwaite towards the educating
of Mary and Elisabeth Michell. They had neglected to do so and were
therefore fined £3. 6_s._ 8_d._, while the churchwardens and overseers
were ordered to provide for the children "according to the last statute
in that case made and provided." _Ib._ p. 96.

[384] The following orders seem to show that regular relief funds could
be taken for granted. A poor succourless child was left in Ossett,
and Ossett was charged with many poor. The three townships of Ossett,
Dewisburie and Suthill were each to pay 16/8^d. for its support. _Ib._
p. 41.

A child came with its mother begging to Northowrom: the mother fell ill
and was carried by the constable to a poor man's house in Shelfe, where
she died. Northowrom was ordered to pay a shilling and Shelfe 4^d.
towards the relief of the child. _Ib._ p. 39. There are several other
orders of the kind. See p. 40.

[Sidenote: 2. (_b_) Work of the justices in first putting the poor law
in execution in the North Riding.]

The North Riding Records begin in 1605 and disclose a somewhat similar
state of things. The system of compulsory poor relief is evidently more
generally in operation. Vigilance in enforcing laws designed to prevent
the growth of a poor population is one of the signs that the poor
rates in a district are high, and in the North Riding much care was
taken to prevent the building of cottages without four acres of land,
and to punish landlords who took in lodgers[385]. Moreover, maimed
soldiers received pensions, the county hospitals were supported and
many orders were made for the relief of particular poor people[386].
A House of Correction was also built, though not until 1619, after
many resolutions had been passed on the subject[387]. On the other
hand, there is also evidence that the organisation did not yet work
smoothly. Overseers are constantly presented for neglecting their
duties, ratepayers for not paying their rates; sometimes even all the
overseers of a parish are presented for not making "cessments," or for
not relieving the poor[388], and in one case not only did the overseer
neglect to obey the justices' order for the relief of a particular poor
man, but the constable refused to obey the warrant for the apprehension
of the overseer[389]. If the justices' difficulties in Yorkshire are
typical of their difficulties elsewhere, it is not surprising that some
of them were negligent.

[385] Thus on April 14, 1607, Rob. Thompson was presented for building
a cottage or habitation for John Joye of Alne, labourer, now occupied
by the same, without assigning to it four acres of land &c., contrary
to the statute 31 Eliz. _North Riding Sessions Rolls_, Vol. I. p. 68.
Several cases of the same kind were presented at Richmond Oct. 8, 1607,
and they occur frequently throughout the North Riding Sessions Rolls
of our period until 1672, except from the period 1634 to 1647. _North
Riding Sessions Rolls_, vol. VI. 177, Oct. 8, 1672. See also pp. 28,
94, 99, 112 &c.

Like presentments were made for harbouring inmates or undersettles
(i.e. lodgers) until 1675, VI. p. 232, e.g. Oct. 8, 1607. Leon.
Marshall of Ravensworth "for keeping of an undersettle for the space of
a moneth &c. and also John Ramshawe, James Foster and Richard Dunn all
of the same: they were fined 10_s._ each." _Ib._ vol. I. p. 95.

[386] Thus there was a disputed liability with regard to Margery
Pearson, and she was to be relieved in accordance with the decision of
Sir Richard Etherington and Tho. Dearle, Esq., _Ib._ vol. I. p. 12.

Elizabeth Scotson of Melmerby is to be provided for by the High
Constable and the churchwardens and overseers of the parish, _Ib._ p.
97. See also pp. 115, 117, 124, 125 &c.

The Treasurer for the hospitals appears all through these records. In
1608 the payments made by Mr Brigges, Treasurer for the Langbaurgh
district, were as follows:--

                                          £   _s._ _d._
  The Hospitall juxta Malton              13    6    8 per ann.
  Hospitall of Sharbrough                  5    0    0
  The Marshallsey                              20    0
                                          ------------
                                    Summa 19    6    8
                                          ------------

At the same time another treasurer for the district distributed
pensions to eleven soldiers amounting altogether to £28. 6_s._ 8_d._
_Quarter Sessions Records, North Riding_, vol. II. p. 257.

[387] _Quarter Sessions Records, North Riding_, Vol. I.

p. 75, 13th July, 1607. "It is ordered that there shalbe a House of
Correction at Thirske within the North ridding of the countie of Yorke."

p. 203. Oct. 2nd, 1610. "Two Houses of Correction shalbe builded
within the North Riding, whereof thone to be within the Liberties of
Richmondshire."

p. 225. April 26, 1611. House fixed upon but not yet used as a House of
Correction.

1612-19. Orders continue about the House of Correction the site of
which was sometimes arranged at Richmond and sometimes at Thirske.

p. 229. Jan. 8, 1619/20. The House was almost finished at Richmond and
the Governor was appointed.

p. 249. Oct. 1620. James Durham committed.

Vol. III. p. 134. Jan. 15th, 1621/2. £100 raised for stock. There are
many entries relating to committals in the succeeding years, vol. III.
pp. 39, 64 &c.

[388] April 29, 1606. Relief of Ellen Killington ordered by parish of
Boltby; the same order is repeated on July 10, pp. 38, 43. _Quarter
Sessions Records, North Riding_, p. 1. The following also were
presented:--

11th April, 1605. Michael Meeke, one of the Churchwardens of Kirkly
on the Wiske for not paying the sum due for lame soldiers and the
hospitals, p. 2.

p. 31. Richard Nicholson, of Topcliffe, for taking on himself the
office of Overseer and declined to fulfil the duties.

p. 99. "Rog. Ringrose of Aymonderly being one of the supervisours of
the poore for Appleton-in-the-Street A.D. 1600 for not having maid his
monethly accompt for the said office for that year and the like for the
years 1601 to 1607 both inclusive."

July 1611, p. 231. The Overseers of Kirklington for not relieving
their poor and exercising their office. Also the Overseers of Wath,
Burneston, Topcliff, West Garfeild and Condall.

Jan. 11, 1632/3. The Churchwardens and Overseers of Grinton for not
making cessments for the relief of their poor, etc., p. 345.

[389] April 11, 1621. _Quarter Sessions Records, North Riding_, vol.
III. p. 115.

[Sidenote: 3. Reports of the justices in response to the Book of
Orders.]

Between 1629 and 1631 there was a new development in consequence of
the frequent orders on behalf of the poor of those years. In each
period of scarcity the justices had been told to allot themselves to
particular divisions for the purpose of carrying out the special orders
sent by the Privy Council. The Book of Orders of January 1630/1 made
this a permanent arrangement so far as the relief of the poor was
concerned[390]. The justices of each particular division were to meet
monthly and examine the overseers and constables so as to see that
their duties with regard to the destitute were properly fulfilled.

[390] See Chapter VIII.

Not only were these orders made but we have evidence that they were
executed. The proclamation of 1629 and the Book of Orders of 1630/1
direct reports of the justices' proceedings to be sent to the Council.
About a thousand reports dealing with the ordinary relief of the poor
were received and are preserved among the State Papers. A few of them
relate to the proclamation of 1629 or to other special letters or
inquiries, but the majority are reports as to the execution of the Book
of Orders of 1630/1. Moreover, three hundred other documents concern
efforts to provide corn at reasonable prices for the poor. These latter
begin to arrive in October, 1630, and are numerous in December. The
series of reports on ordinary poor relief are exceptional in 1630, but
were received frequently in April and May, 1631. Both series of reports
were returned until 1633; after that date there are few corn reports,
but those dealing with the poor continue until 1639, when both cease
altogether[391]. A proclamation is issued in 1640, and, like that of
1629, orders the execution of the poor laws and the provision of stocks
for the employment of the poor; it also orders special inquiry by the
judges as to how far these orders were executed, and as to how far
they were successful[392]. But there are no more reports, and it seems
most probable that no more were sent. These documents thus relate to
the years 1630 to 1639, that is to the greater part of the period of
the personal government of Charles I. They exist in consequence of the
action of the Privy Council and form the chief evidence as to how far
that action was effectual.

[391] One letter in the form of a corn report and several reports
dealing with ordinary poor relief are printed in the Appendix.

[392] _Proclamation Book_, Chas. I., No. 228.

The details of these returns will have to be considered in every part
of our subject, and especially when we come to discuss the relief
given to the able-bodied poor. We will now only examine their general
character, partly in order that we may see what sort of work was done
by the justices acting under the special instructions of the Privy
Council, and partly that we may understand the kind of evidence which
is furnished by these documents. We have seen that the orders issued
by the Privy Council to the justices concerning the poor were similar
in form to those that had previously been issued concerning corn. The
reports sent in answer to them are also similar to the corn reports
of 1587. They are sometimes addressed to the Sheriff, often to the
judges of Assize, and occasionally directly to the Lords Commissioners
or Lords of the Privy Council[393]. The justices adopt many different
methods in making their returns. Occasionally they enclose the
reports of the overseers, or give a full abstract of them[394]. But
more usually the justices only state the general nature of their
doings, occasionally inserting details about particular assessments,
workhouses, or fresh methods of employing their poor. Incidentally they
frequently give us information as to the state of trade, the number of
recusants, the population, weights and measures, and the difficulties
in the way of administration[395].

[393] See Appendix XII. Reports B. E. and H. were sent first to the
sheriff, C. is sent to the Lords of the Privy Council, G. was delivered
to the judges of assize.

[394] See Appendix XII. B. F. G.

[395] See Appendix XII. D. E. F. New assessments and the increase of
assessments are frequently mentioned, e.g. _Dom. S. P._, Chas. I., vol.
192, 79; the fines of people who do not go to church in many others,
e.g. Hitchen and Broadwater, _D. S. P._, Chas. I., vol. 238, No. 42.
Other reports state whether there is employment in the cloth trade or
other occupations, e.g. _D. S. P._, vol. 190, 54. In this report the
justices of Babergh and Cosford report that the clothiers are on the
point of dismissing their workfolk. It is interesting also to learn
that on April 5, 1631, Portsmouth only had corn for 20 days "there
being resident w^{th}in the said Towne and Liberties therof six hundred
persons att the least." _D. S. P._, Chas. I., vol. 188.

There are one or two cases in which they give the minutes of their
meetings. One of these is sent by the justices of the Alton division of
Hampshire and will give us an idea of how these special meetings were
conducted. The Sheriff sent a letter and the Orders to these justices
on February 10th, 1631. They held their first meeting on March 12th,
and three others before May 1st, so that they seem very anxious to set
things in order[396].

[396] _D. S. P. Chas. I._, vol. 189, 66.

On March 12th from Fropfield John Godden was presented for "being
drunk on the Sabbath day," John Roake "for liveing idlye," and four
others for "useinge unlawfull games in tyme of eveninge prayer." Five
children were also placed apprentices. From Petersfield there were
three cases of a man being accused of "liveinge idly and mainteyninge
himself none knowes howe." Warrants were sent for some others for
"teareinge of hedges." Six were fined a shilling each "for beinge
absent from diuine service," and John Aylenge paid eighteenpence as he
was suspected of being drunk. Richard Wolgatt was presented for keeping
"a common alehouse w^{th}out lycence but noe process beinge made to
convict him; yt was prohibited." The children fit for service of this
place also were placed apprentices. Similar cases were settled for the
other places at the other meetings. But the most important part of
the proceedings for our purpose is the presentment of the constables
and churchwardens. The constables and tithingmen stated what rogues
had been punished in every tithing, "the churchwardens and overseers
of the poore made presentm^t of the nomber of theire impotent poore
in theire severall parishes, the nomber of theire able poore and howe
they are releived and the other sett to worke and of all other thinges
concerninge theire office." At the fourth meeting, held on April 30th
at Petersfield, the accounts of the churchwardens and overseers were
taken and new overseers appointed for the next year. Moreover, besides
all this "articles in writing" were given to the constables, tithingmen
and overseers of which they were to give an exact account at the next
meeting.

The report for the town of Cambridge gives perhaps even a better idea
of the work done by the justices but no details of cases. As we shall
have to refer so often to these justices' reports, it is worth while to
quote this one in full in order that we may have a clear idea of what
these documents were like.

      To the right Ho^{le}: the Lords and others of his Ma^{ties}
                     most Ho^{le} privy Councell.

 The certificate of the Maior, Aldermen and Justice of the peace
 w^{th}in the Towne of Cambridge and the lib(er)ties thereof
 concerninge his Ma^{ties} orders and direccons sent unto us in printed
 bookes together w^{th} letters from yo^r Hono^{rs} for the due
 puttinge in execucon such Lawes as tend to the releivinge of impotent
 poore people, settinge to worke those that be able, and punishinge
 those that be idle, and reformeinge of divers abuses and disorders
 therein menconed.

 Humbly sheweth,

 1. That accordinge to the said orders and letters, we presentlie uppon
 receipt thereof did assemble o^rselues together and calld before us
 the High Constables, petty Constables, Churchwardens, and overseers
 of the poore of o^r said Towne and gave them strictlie in charge for
 the performance of the service therein required accordinge to the said
 orders and direccons.

 2. That we have ever since kept and continewed o^r weekely
 meetings and there caused the said Constables dulie to make theire
 presentm^{ts} and from tyme to tyme have strictly called them to
 particular accompt concerninge the apprehendinge and punishinge of
 rogues and vagabonds for disorderly tiplinge, useinge unlawfull games
 and other misdemeanors in alehouses.

 3. That we have caused the said Constables to see the watches and
 wardes duly kept accordinge to lawe and to restrayne wandringe and
 goeing aboute of beggers and alsoe for safety and good order.

 4. That we have taken divers presentments of the said officers and
 inflicted punishment accordinge to lawe of the offenders both for
 drunknes for inordinate hauntinge of alehouses, for profanacon
 of the Saboth by Carriers travellinge with packhorses and carts,
 with butchers sellinge of meate, for profane swearinge and other
 misdemeanors and have caused the penalties to be duly taken and
 distributed accordinge to the lawe.

 5. That we beinge exceedingly oppressed w^{th} poore since o^r last
 heavy visitacon have taken order at o^r weekely meetings for the
 competent releife of the impotent, by raiseinge and increasinge the
 monthly rates in all o^r parishes to a treble and quadruple proportion
 through o^r towne for to keepe them from begginge and wandringe aboute.

 6. That we have caused the churchwardens and overseers of o^r severall
 parishes to sett to worke all such poore as are able to worke
 beinge of seaven yeares of age and upwards or to bynde them forth
 apprentises. And for the better performance of theire duties therein
 and whatt ells belongs to theire office we doe take of them a iust and
 exact accompt the ffirst weeke in every month howe they dispose of
 there monthly colleccon and other monies comeinge to there hands and
 alsoe howe the impotent poore are provided for and releived and the
 rest imployed and sett to worke and for punishment of such as are idle
 or refuse to worke.

 7. And as touchinge the Assize of bread and beare, as alsoe for
 punishinge of bakers, bruers, ingrosers, forestallers and the like
 (w^{ch} the governo^{rs} of the universitie clayme to belonge to them)
 we leave to the vicechancelor and governers thereof accordinge to
 there Charter of priviledge w^{ch} they challendge.

  May 2^o 1631.      SAMUEL SPALDYNG, Maior.
                     MARTIN PERSE.
                     RICHARD FOXTON.
                     EDWARD COPLEY.
                     JOHN WICKSTED.
                     ROBT. LUKYN.
                     THOMAS ATKINSON.
                     THO. PURCHAS.
                     JOHN SCHIREWOODE.
                     JOHN BADCOCKE[397].

[397] _D. S. P._, Chas. I., vol. 190, No. 13.

As the main part of our evidence depends on the justices' reports we
must determine whether the methods described in these returns are
typical of those employed all over the country or whether we have
reports only from the more energetic justices. Now we hear of some
instances of finding work for the unemployed from other sources[398].
If we possessed all the most favourable cases in our reports all or
most of these instances would be found amongst them. But this is
not the fact; some are reported and some are not. It is clear then
energetic administration of the law existed which was not mentioned in
the reports now preserved amongst the State Papers. We may therefore
conclude that the reports do not come only from vigorous administrators
but are fairly typical of the whole country.

[398] See note Chapter XII. for cases of employing the poor in counties
and towns where no justices' reports definitely report anything of the
kind.

The minutes of the meetings at Alton and the report of the justices
of Cambridge give us a good idea of the effect of the Orders and
Directions on the justices. In the first place they show us that a
number of meetings were held in consequence of the Book of Orders.
In some cases these meetings seem to have taken place every month
throughout the period from 1631 to 1639[399]; but from a report of
Lord Fairfax it appears that special inquiries into the requirements
of the Book of Orders were made only once a year in his part of
Yorkshire[400]. The meetings, even if they were only infrequent, must
have had a considerable influence in improving the execution of the
poor laws.

[399] _e.g._ Appendix XII. H.

[400] _D. S. P._, Chas. I., Vol. 293, No. 129. Report from Ryedale,
July 1635.

On these occasions a number of offences were punished. Some were
connected with the relief of the poor because the fines exacted
were used for that purpose. Among these were such faults as playing
at unlawful games, getting drunk, swearing, the "profanacon of the
Saboth," and not going to church[401]. Other cases related to breaches
of the vagrancy laws and of that part of the poor law which placed upon
the overseers the duty of seeing that all who had not any means were
set to work[402].

[401] All these are mentioned in the above-mentioned reports from Alton
and Cambridge. The fines for not going to church were often regularly
exacted. In one report we are told that some of the accused were too
poor to pay and that others had compounded for recusancy, Vol. 300, No.
17.

[402] See Chapter VIII. See above, Alton and Cambridge. See also
Appendix XII. B. Westmill.

But the presentment of offenders was only a part of the duties to the
poor discharged at the meetings. Arrangements were made for binding
children apprentice, and pressure was exercised on the subordinate
poor law officials to properly perform their duties. The justices
found out how many poor were relieved and what each received, and they
inquired whether there was a stock for their employment[403]. They
also, when necessary, urged the increase of rates, the raising of a
new fund, or the provision of stores of corn to be sold to the poor
at lower prices. The whole system shows how much of the social side of
government depended upon the justices, and may perhaps induce us to
sympathise with the complaint of the gentlemen of Nottingham that they
have "little rest either att home or abroade[404]."

[403] The proceedings at these meetings closely resemble those at
Petty Sessions. If these meetings were identical with the ordinary
Petty Sessions, then these latter must have been held more frequently
in consequence of the Book of Orders. Many of the reports, like that
of Cambridge, expressly state that the meetings they report were
held because of the letters and orders of January 1631, _e.g._ see
Winchester, _D. S. P._, Chas. I., Vol. 188, No. 101.

[404] _Dom. State Papers_, Chas. I., Vol. 189, No. 42.

[Sidenote: 4 _a_. The work of the judges. Authoritative decisions on
points of law.]

The judges also were concerned in the administration of the system
of poor relief partly in the ordinary course of their duties, and
partly in consequence of the special action of the Privy Council. It
was the custom of the time to obtain interpretations of law from the
judges in reply to general questions and not only through the decision
of particular cases. These interpretations were given not only in
such cases as the imprisonment of Members of Parliament, but also in
matters affecting the poor law. A long list of resolutions was arrived
at on the statute of 1597-8 concerning the interpretation of that
statute[405]. Other questions arose later, and were decided in the
same way. Thus in 1620 there was a dispute in the town of Lydd which
led to the seizure of the bailiff's cattle and his retirement from the
magisterial Bench of his ungrateful town[406]. The query is submitted
as to the legality of a tax for the poor which was levied on the
inhabitants of a parish for their lands and goods in gross, and on the
farmers for their land per acre. Sir Robert Houghton and Sir Ranulph
Carew decided in its favour, and the paper is endorsed "The question of
taxing for the poor of Lydd decyded by the Judges of Assize[407]." We
have already seen that the Council told the justices of Suffolk that it
was the resolution of all the judges that they themselves might levy a
tax to employ the poor[408], and in 1633 also many decisions on points
of law were issued as the resolutions of the judges of assize[409].

[405] See Chapter VIII.

[406] _Dom. State Papers_, James I., Vol. 115, Nos. 98, 100.

[407] _Dom. Stat. Papers_, James I., Vol. 116, No. 51.

[408] See p. 154 _supra_.

[409] Michael Dalton, _The Countrey Justice_, ed. 1655, p. 115. The
resolutions are given in the form of answers to questions submitted
to the judges on particular points of law. They decided among other
things, that a man must take an apprentice if the justices so ordered
whether payment were made or not; that all the lands in the parish must
be rated equally, but that an extra sum might be levied from a man
"for his visible ability" within the parish; and also various points
concerning settlement. One question and answer are as follows:

_Qu._ If one who is under the age of 30 years and brought up in
husbandry or a maid servant, or brought up in any of the arts or trades
mentioned in the statute, 5 Eliz. cap. 4, and not enabled according
to that stat. to live at his or her own hand, shall be warned by two
justices of the peace to put him or her self in service by a day
prescribed by them, and shall not doe the same accordingly, but shall
after continue living at his or her own hand, what course shall be
taken with such a person and how punished?

_Resol._ Such persons being out of service, and not having visible
means of their own, to maintain themselves without their labour, and
refusing to serve as a hired servant, by the yeer, may be bound over to
the next Sessions or Assises, and to be of good behaviour in the mean
time, or may be sent to the house of correction. These resolutions of
the judges are quoted by Dalton as having great authority.

[Sidenote: 4 _b_. Administrative work as the link between the Privy
Council and the justices.]

But the duties of the judges of assize under the orders of the Privy
Council were much more important. They had to act as the link between
the central government and the county and municipal officials. They
were particularly ordered to let the Council know which justices did
their duty[410], and many of the reports were sent in to them. In March
1630 we hear that in Suffolk malting was prohibited in the interest
of the poor by the judges of assize in order to increase the supply
of barley[411]; a little earlier the Norwich authorities had great
difficulty in controlling the maltsters, but stated that with the
approbation of the judges they had arranged that no alehouse should
be licensed but such as entered into a recognisance by sureties to
sell two "thurdendeles" of beer for a penny[412]. The work done by the
judges is indicated by one or two references of this kind[413], and
since some of the later orders of the Privy Council were especially
directed to them it seems probable that they had a great deal of
influence in enforcing the orders of the Council.

[410] _Privy Council Register_, 16 Oct., 1633.

[411] _Dom. State Papers_, Chas. I., Vol. 187, No. 22.

[412] _Dom. State Papers_, Chas. I., Vol. 186, No. 16.

[413] In 1631 also a dispute about a poor rate in Marlborough was
referred to the Lords of the Council and was sent by them to the Lord
Chief Justice and judges of assize. _Privy Co. Reg._, 13th May, 1631.

[Sidenote: 5 _a_. The work of the overseers in 1599.]

The last authority who was responsible for the execution of the poor
law was the overseer. He it was who had to do the work, the function of
all the others was to make him do it. It was the duty of the overseers
to know all about the poor in their parish; to fix the amount of the
assessment and to levy it proportionately. They had also to provide
pensions and habitations for the impotent poor, to find masters for
apprentices and to procure work for the unemployed. The overseers'
accounts for Staplegrove in the county of Somerset in the year 1599
will show us something of their ordinary work. Payments were made by
twenty-two parishioners quarterly and by sixteen weekly, while two of
the inhabitants took charge of two impotent people. Ten poor people
received payment of a small sum every week on what we should now call
the outdoor relief system. Besides this money had been disbursed in
order to provide for a pauper's burial, to recompense tithingmen
for receiving the poor strangers that were brought to them, and to
purchase clothes and wood for the older poor and also outfits for
apprentices[414]. In this account there is nothing about setting the
poor to work, but the rest of the poor law seems to have been well
executed in 1599.

[414] See Appendix.

[Sidenote: 5 _b_. When stirred to greater activity by scarcity
measures.]

The kind of instruction given to the overseers when the justices were
stirred to greater activity than usual may be gathered from a paper in
the Tanner Manuscripts. It is entitled "A true copy of the charge given
to the overseers of every towne the 19 of December 1623," and must
refer to some particular county or some particular division. During the
early part of this year the price of corn was high and the justices
took many measures to provide for the poor. The sufferings of the
poor in the preceding winter may be the reason that the justices were
more strict in their supervision at this time. There are altogether
eight orders, one of which relates to alehouses; the constables and
overseers are ordered to see that the labourers and other poor are well
served with bread and beer, and that they do not linger longer than
is necessary for the delivery of the bread and beer. Another order
shows how very inquisitorial was the character of the Government of the
time: there was certainly no notion that the Englishman's house was his
castle. The overseers and one of the constables were twice every week
to search the houses of the labourers at night to see that all were at
home, and also to look out for any articles that the people might be
suspected of stealing. Several of the orders concern the keeping of the
poor at work[415]. Others arrange that children, not yet old enough to
be apprentices, should be taught to spin by some honest woman in the
town, who was to have a penny a week for each child until it could earn
something for itself. Beggars were to be punished, and provision of
fuel was to be made for the poor[416]. We can see how far removed this
system was from our own notions of liberty, and we can also see that if
the overseers performed these orders, they had even more reason than
the justices to complain of hard work. There is a great deal about the
provision of work and comparatively little about pensions, so that here
it seems likely that the overseers were more likely to provide for the
impotent without pressure than to find work for the unemployed. During
the years 1631 to 1640 we are often told that "articles" were delivered
to the overseers, and this document is not improbably typical of some
of them. For these are the kind of matters commented on by the justices
whenever they enter into details at all[417].

[415] See _supra_, p. 142.

[416] "A true coppy of the charge given to the overseers of every
towne," Dec. 19, 1623. Tanner MSS. LXXIII. II. f. 390.

[417] See justices' reports, Appendix XII.

[Sidenote: 5 _c_. After the issue of the Book of Orders.]

We have seen that in a few of the justices' returns the reports of the
overseers were enclosed. The justices of the Liberty of St Alban's sent
their answers in this manner. They were responsible for the parishes of
Chipping Barnet, East Barnet, Elstree and Northaw. In 1637 they still
held monthly meetings, and the overseers' accounts returned at them
will give us some idea of the work often done by overseers when they
were supervised in the special manner ordered in 1631 and continued
until 1640. At the January meeting of 1637 the justices gave "charge
that the presentments should be better and more fully certified[418]";
at the February meeting, therefore, fairly detailed reports were
returned from three of the four parishes[419]. At Chipping Barnet we
hear they have no Popish recusants or non-churchgoers. They have not
put forth any apprentice during the month, but are about to bind a
certain fatherless child. One of the magistrates undertook to see the
boy was bound before the next meeting. One family had apparently been
stricken with plague, and had been paid eight shillings before they
were shut up; eight weekly pensions were paid to impotent people, one
to a "Mad Tib," and two people receive payments for taking care of
children. The report also states that "we have in towe and yarne and
cloath xx^s and in money to buy more xx^s." From this account it is
clear that the poor were actually set to work in Chipping Barnet and
that not all the funds available for the purpose were utilised. From
Northaw the constables only report, but their return concerns poor
relief as well as vagrants. They say all the impotent poor are relieved
while the poor that can work are "sett on work and doe not refuse the
same." In this virtuous parish also none disorder themselves with
drinking or frequent alehouses during divine service on the Lord's
day and no idlers could be found though the constables had diligently
searched for them. From Elstree we have an account of the pensions paid
to certain poor people, and we have also the statements that "we have
in stocke for the poore remayning forty shillings," and "we set such on
worke as want uppon euery occasion." East Barnet makes no return, and a
warrant is sent for the overseers to answer the contempt. On April 9th,
1639, they send a report, and then relieve only one impotent person,
but have eight pounds in hand for setting the poor to work[420].

[418] _Dom. State Papers_, Chas. I., Vol. 344, No. 30.

[419] _Ib._, Vol. 347, No. 67.

[420] _Ib._, Vol. 418, No. 21.

If therefore we may take these reports as specimens of rural parishes,
we see that in each parish a stock existed for setting the poor to
work, and that there does not seem to have been any great difficulty
about the unemployed. The relief of the impotent and the apprenticing
of children appear to have been carefully looked after, and the
justices were prompt to notice any omission in the reports. We shall
see later that there is reason to believe that these parishes were not
exceptional, but that under the supervision of the justices the same
kind of measures were taken in many parts of southern England.

We have already seen that the central government, the Privy Council,
energetically tried to enforce the law, and that this increased energy
makes the seventeenth century the important period in England for
the poor law administration. We now see that in justices, judges and
overseers the local government existed through which the action of
the Privy Council could be made effectual. It is in this that England
differed from other European countries, particularly from France and
Scotland. We have drawn our information chiefly from the official
records of Privy Council, justices or overseers. We have noted examples
in the work of the justices and overseers in which the action of the
Privy Council did have a considerable effect. We have also seen that a
large body of evidence exists which will give us much information as
to the methods of relief employed, and may enable us to tell how far
the system was successful. We have now to see how this organisation
affected the poor, and how far it was generally enforced in all parts
of the country.

We will therefore cease to examine the system from the point of view of
the administrative machinery, and instead consider, first, the relief
which it afforded the various classes of poor, and secondly, the extent
to which the organisation, whose nature we have described, was employed
over the whole country.




CHAPTER X.

1597-1644.

METHODS OF RELIEF.

A. _In Times of Emergency._

  § 1. The methods in which the Scarcity Orders of the Privy Council
were executed in 1623 and 1630-1.
     _a._ The suppression of alehouses and restrictions of malting.
     _b._ The regulations for serving the markets with corn and supplying
the poor in their homes.
     _c._ Selling corn bought by the inhabitants to the labourers under the
market price.
     _d._ Other special methods of providing food for the poor.
  § 2. Evidence as to the success or failure of the corn regulations.
  § 3. Reasons for their adoption.
  § 4. Bearing of the scarcity measures on history of poor relief.
      _a._ Growth of organisation.
      _b._ The standard of life of the poorer classes.
  § 5. Provision of fuel for the poor in winter.
  § 6. Help afforded in times of sickness or plague.
  § 7. Contributions to sufferers from fire.
  § 8. Two characteristics of seventeenth century poor relief accentuated
by this emergency relief.
     _a._ Little distinction between paupers and non-paupers.
     _b._ Little distinction between relief afforded by voluntary
contributions and that provided by poor rates.


The special emergencies in which the poor most often obtained relief in
the seventeenth century were those arising from bad harvests, sickness,
and fire.

We will first examine the methods of supplying the poor with corn
after bad harvests. We have already seen that in 1608, 1621-3, and
1629-31 the central government issued orders with this object, which
closely resembled the commands which had been issued during the reign
of Elizabeth. We have now to see how these orders were executed in the
early part of the seventeenth century.

In 1608 there is little evidence in this direction. A report however
was sent from Colchester. There, the constables took an account of
the number of persons that had corn by them; of the bargains they had
made and of the number of acres they had sown, and in accordance with
that survey every person was ordered to bring weekly to market so many
bushels of corn unless they had already sold them to poor artificers
and day labourers[421]. There were probably like reports from other
places but there is nothing to make us think that the scarcity Book of
Orders was better executed in 1608 than it had been in 1587 or 1597.

[421] Morant's _Essex_, p. 53.

[Sidenote: 1. The methods in which the scarcity orders of the Privy
Council were executed in 1623 and 1630-1.]

But in 1623 and in 1630-31 there are returns from many different
parts of the country, and these seem to show that the orders which
were occasionally put in force under Elizabeth were frequently put in
force under James I., and were usually well executed in the season of
scarcity in the reign of Charles I.

[Sidenote: _a._ The suppression of alehouses, and restrictions of
malting.]

The Book of Orders issued in each period of scarcity contained
directions for limiting the quantity of malt and for suppressing
unnecessary alehouses. This was the case because barley bread was the
chief food of the poor, and they would be more easily able to obtain a
supply if the barley which would have been used for malt was brought
to the markets. The corn reports of 1623 and 1630-1 for the most part
state in general terms that these directions had been carried out[422].
Moreover sometimes the justices enter into details and show that they
had taken great care in putting this part of the Council's orders
into execution. Thus in 1623 the number of alehouses in Banbury was
reduced by one-third, in Ripon by a half, while in Wycombe only nine
were licensed out of twenty-one[423]. In April 1631 also in Bradford,
in Hertford, and in Stafford more than half the alehouses were
suppressed[424].

[422] See reports from Newbury, six hundreds of Norfolk, Taunton, nine
hundreds of Somerset, Wentllooge in Monmouthshire, Bridgewater, the
soke of Peterborough and the wildish parts of Pevensey, all returned
between May 21st and May 31st, 1631.

[423] _Cal. of State Papers._ Ripon, Feb. 25, 1623, Banbury, Mar. 1st,
Wycombe, Mar. 12.

[424] _Dom. State Papers_, Chas. I., Vol. 189, Stafford, No. 1, I.,
Bradford and Haworth, No. 8, V., Hertford, Vol. 189, No. 79.

Similar details show us that the making of malt was carefully
regulated. In 1623 the justices of South Hampshire fixed the total
quantity of barley that might be used for this purpose in the county
and allotted a definite quantity to each division: a hundred quarters
were allotted to each of the divisions of Andover and Fawley,
eighty quarters to that of Alton, and in proportion to the other
divisions[425]. At other times malting was suppressed altogether, as
in three hundreds of Herefordshire in 1623[426] and at Taunton in
1631[427].

[425] _Dom. State Papers_, Jac. I., Vol. 138, No. 14.

[426] _Ib._, Vol. 140, 25. The three hundreds were those of Stretford,
Grimsworth, and Wigmore.

[427] _Ib._, Chas. I., Vol. 192, No. 34.

Occasionally malting was continued by some of the maltsters, but in
order to counterbalance the injury to the poor they contributed in some
special way to their support. Thus at Warwick in 1623 the maltsters
brought corn to market and sold at a shilling a bushel under the market
price to the poorer people, while at Stafford in 1631 the maltsters who
had continued their trade in the town agreed to contribute a specified
sum to the support of the poor in several of the surrounding country
districts[428]. At Norwich some of the maltsters were disobedient,
and they were there ordered as a punishment to bring corn to the
public granary and sell it at low rates to the poor[429]. It is thus
clear that this regulation of the consumption of ale was made in the
interests of the poor, and that it was carefully executed in 1623 and
1631.

[428] _Ib._, Jas. I., Vol. 138, No. 88; Chas. I., Vol. 192, No. 25.

[429] Court Book of Norwich for the Court held 1st Feb. 1630/1.

[Sidenote: _b._ Regulations for serving the markets with corn and for
supplying the poor in their homes.]

As in 1586 and in 1597 elaborate surveys of the quantities of corn
possessed by each owner were made both in 1623 and 1630-1, and in
accordance with these surveys the farmers were ordered to bring a
proportional amount of their produce to market[430]. Moreover in
1623 and in 1631 increased attention was paid to the difficulties
experienced by the labourers who had not sufficient leisure to come to
market for the small quantities they were able to buy at a time. In
Babergh and Cosford and in Thingoe in 1623, arrangements were made for
their supply at home[431]. In 1631 more organised plans were adopted.
At Lewes a survey was made of the quantity of corn available and a
reasonable proportion was then allotted to each householder: out of the
residue the poor of every parish were to have enough to serve them,
while any that was then left over was to be sent to market[432]: in the
lath of Shepway two-thirds of the corn was sold to poor artificers at
home, while only one-third was brought to market and there sold to the
poor or to anyone who wanted to buy for his own consumption[433].

[430] Thus in 1623 detailed returns were sent in by the constables of
Devonshire, Vol. 144, 32, V. to XXXIV., while an especially elaborate
report was sent from the hundred of Pider in Cornwall on Dec. 2nd,
1630. The bushel there consisted of twenty gallons, and a return is
made of the number of people in every household, of the quantity of
barley, oats and wheat possessed by every owner, of how much of it was
already sold, of the names of the brewers, bakers, and maltsters, and
of how much they brewed and baked every week. _D. S. P._, Jas. I., Vol.
176, No. 13.

It is perhaps interesting to notice that as early as 1613-14 a special
payment was made to Rich. Aucher, Sergeant-at-Mace, "for his attendance
at corne market in the deare yeares to see that such corne were brought
in as appoynted by the justices," _Hist. Man. Com._, Rep. IX., Appendix
I. 162 a.

[431] _D. S. P._, Jas. I., Vol. 142, 14.

[432] _Ib._, Vol. 189, 15.

[433] _Ib._, Vol. 189, 6.

[Sidenote: _c._ Selling corn to labourers under price.]

But in some respects the corn measures of 1623 and 1631 were not only
better executed but provided more direct relief than those of former
times. We know that the town rulers in 1586 and 1597 bought particular
quantities of corn for the inhabitants[434], and that individual owners
like the Duke of Rutland sold their corn under price. The reports of
1623 and 1630-1 indicate a great extension of this practice both in
London, in other corporate towns, and in the country.

[434] See pp. 123, 124 _supra_.

[Sidenote: Corn sold under price to the poor in London.]

Even before 1520 the City rulers possessed a magazine of corn. In
1622 a regular system of selling to the poor under price was so much
the usual plan that the Lords of the Privy Council complained of
the method by which the Companies furnished their quota of corn for
this purpose. Each Company contracted with the bakers to furnish the
quantity required from its members. The wardens however were told
that this course "would rather lessen the stoare than replenish the
markett"; they must import for themselves from abroad so that the
total supply in the City might be increased[435]. In 1630-1 even more
vigorous methods were taken. The population of London was numbered,
so that it was found that there were 130,280 people in the City, and
the Lord Mayor calculated that five thousand quarters a month would be
necessary to provide for all the inhabitants[436]. Each Company had to
provide a certain quantity at under rates for the poor and was required
to state how much of this supply they had in their granaries[437]. The
efforts made to lower the price were for a time successful, and in
December 1630 the Lord Mayor ordered the price of meal to be reduced in
proportion to the fall in the price of grain[438].

[435] _Privy Council Reg._, 23rd Dec. 1622, Vol. 5, p. 543.

[436] This amount was arrived at by calculating that eight ounces a day
would serve for each person, counting "the little" with "the great."
Remembrancia.

[437] _D. S. P._, Chas. I., Vol. 197, 61. In July 1631 the Companies
had a very small proportion of the quantity they had to supply in their
possession.

[438] _Privy Council Reg._, 14 Dec. 1630. The Lord Mayor appears to
have fixed the price of grain. See the complaint of the badgers of
Chipping Wycombe.

[Sidenote: Selling under price in large towns.]

In other large towns similar plans were adopted both in 1621-1623
and in 1629-1631. In 1623 the Bailiffs of Derby report "wee have
alsoe at the charge of the cheife and ablest inhabitants of this
Burrowe provided 140 q^{ters} of corne w^{ch} wee weekely afford to
the poore as their necessities require under the comon price of the
markett[439]." In the later period, 1630 and 1631, Norwich spent £300
for this purpose and then borrowed more; Great Yarmouth, Leicester and
Buckingham made similar provision[440]. There is no reason to think
these towns were exceptional; there are comparatively few reports from
the corporate towns in 1630 but we have already seen that in Bristol
and Shrewsbury stores had been bought in earlier years, and their
action was probably similar now to that of London and Norwich.

[439] _Dom. State Papers_, Jas. I., Vol. 143, 35, 2.

[440] Norwich. Numerous resolutions are recorded by the Court Books,
18th Oct. 1630. "Some of the corne in the City Granary shalbe weekely
ground into meale and solde to the poore in the market."

14th Feb. Corn is bought for the poor and delivered to the aldermen of
each ward weekly to be sold.

6th Mar. The corn delivered to the poor to be two parts barley, one
wheat, and one rye.

8th June. Barley bought.

15th June. Rye bought.

2nd July. Wheat bought for 30_s._ the combe, rye 25_s._ and barley
16_s._ To be sold to the poor at 16_s._ the combe; the three grains
equally mixed.

Between 25th Feb. and 25th March, 1631. £114. 18_s._ 10_d._ "was given
towards buyeinge of corn for the poor."

See also _Dom. S. P._, Chas. I., Vol. 186, 26, 191, 54.

Great Yarmouth, _Dom. S. P._, Chas. I., Vol. 188, 80. "There hath beene
300^{li} laid out to buy corne w^{ch} hath beene brought into the comon
graineries of the towne and there by parcells delivered to the poore
inhabitants of this towne under the rate of the markett price which
hath beene a great releife to the poore."

Leicester, Vol. 191, 69.

Buckingham, Vol. 187, 2, i.

Ware, Vol. 189, 80.

"93^{li} to buy corne for the poore and sold them at iiijs the bushell."

[Sidenote: Stores of corn sold under price to the country labourers.]

The same plan was also adopted in the country. It was recommended by
the Council, but it is not one of the fixed regulations enforced by
them. In one case however we find that a small sum of money had been
collected for a magazine of corn in Suffolk, and that now the Council
ordered it to be used to supply the poor of Halesworth[441].

[441] _Privy Council Register_, 18th Dec. 1830.

In many other cases corn was provided by the inhabitants themselves
often by voluntary agreement made under the persuasion of the justices.
In 1623 this method of helping the poor was usual in Hertfordshire. In
March the Sheriff sends to the Council reports from the justices of the
greater part of the country. He states that the justices and gentlemen
have "by there good and charitable exsamples and perswasiones"
provided a quantity of corn at nearly half the market price in "euery
parish where neede requireth." There was enough to last until next
harvest and they hope "noe complainte of the pore shall hereafter
add any disturbance unto his Ma^{ti's} most graciouse pittifull, and
charitable minde[442]."

[442] _D. S. P._, James I., Vol. 140, 41. This statement is confirmed
by the reports enclosed by the Sheriff from the justices responsible
for the divisions of Braughin, of Hitchen, of Edwinstree and Odsey and
of Dacorum. These all state that in most of the "townes" the poorer
people have corn provided them far under the market rate.

In districts of Devonshire and Suffolk[443] also like plans were
tried in 1623, while in 1631 similar methods of relief seem to have
been universal in the counties of Essex and Norfolk, and to have been
adopted in some districts in almost every eastern county.

[443] At Crediton, West Budleigh and part of Wonford in Devon and in
several districts of Suffolk, _e.g._ in the hundreds of Blything,
Wangford, Mutford and Lothingland corn was sold to the poor under the
market price. _D. S. P._, Jac. I., Vol. 142, Nos. 37, II. and 14.

Thus in December 1630 in four of the hundreds of Essex arrangements
were made for supplying the people with corn at home. The chief
inhabitants "of theire owne accords" laid in a store for the poor
allowing 7_d._, 18_d._ or 2_s._ the bushel and giving an equivalent
amount in money to those that did not bake their own bread[444]. Next
month we hear that this plan had been adopted in most of the shire;
every parish had its store and the poor were served at 18_d._ and 2_s._
a bushel under the usual price. Sometimes when grain was scarce, bread
and money were given instead. Our informant states that this provision
of corn for the poor at cheap rates had had a considerable effect in
lowering the price of grain[445]. From every hundred of Norfolk a
report of the state of the corn supply of the poor was received, and
some arrangement of this kind is usually reported. In some hundreds
two degrees of poverty were recognised. The very poor only paid
half-a-crown a bushel for their barley, but "the labourers y^t had
nott so much neede" were served at three shillings[446].

[444] The hundreds of Dunmow, Uttlesford, Freshwell and Clavering. _D.
S. P._, Chas. I., Vol. 177, 43.

[445] Jan. 7th, 1631. _Dom. State Papers_, Chas. I., Vol. 182, 20.

[446] Hundred of South Greenhoe and half hundreds of Grimshoe and
Wayland. Rye was also sold to the very poor at 3_s._ 4_d._ and to the
poor at 4_s._ May 1631, _Dom. S. P._, Chas. I., Vol. 191, No. 78. Other
stores in Norfolk are reported as follows:

i. At Blofield, Walsham and Taverham barley was sold to the poor for
2_s._ 6_d._ rye at 3_s._ 4_d._, and buck for 20_d._: all far under the
market rate, Vol. 186, 16, Vol. 190, 20.

ii. West Flegg, East Flegg, Happing and Tunstead a sufficient quantity
of barley and buck "for the most part in euery towne throughout all the
sayd hundreds is set aside to be issued to ye poore at a reasonable
rate." Vol. 192, 19, (_D. S. P._, Chas. I.).

iii. In Earsham, Diss, Deepwade and Henstead corn was provided for the
labourers in every parish. _D. S. P._, Chas. I., Vol. 191, 79, Vol.
186, 16.

iv. A like arrangement was made in Forehoe, Mitford and Humbleyard,
Vol. 190, 8.

In this county therefore the store for the poor was probably generally
adopted all over the county.

This plan does not seem to have been general in Yorkshire, but it
was adopted by at least eight hundreds[447]. There are moreover many
examples of stores of this kind in Hertfordshire and some in every
Eastern county except Northumberland and Lincolnshire[448]. The fact
that special mention is made of poor labourers shows that relief was
not confined to the disabled or to paupers. It was given in the eastern
counties more than in the western probably because the scarcity was
more felt in the east and the poor were in greater distress[449].

[447] Eight hundreds of York, Vol. 177, 31. See App. XI.

[448] (1) Herts.: Edwinstree and Odsey. The poor were relieved at under
rates in their parishes. Vol. 182, 40, _D. S. P._, Chas. I.

Braughin, 189, 80, _D. S. P._, Chas. I. See Appendix.

Part of the Liberty of St Alban's and hundred of Cashio, 188, 43, _D.
S. P._, Chas. I.

Hertford. The poor are relieved by "corne or otherwise," 189, 79, _D.
S. P._, Chas. I.

(2) Sussex: Lewes, Vol. 189, 15. "Some charitable well-disposed persons
sell to the poore at lower rates."

Pevensey, Vol. 192, 99. The justices "dealt w^{th} the most
substantiall inhabitants ... who partly by the perswasions of us and of
theire ministers and of theire owne charytable disposition haue laid
corne in some one parish about 30 pounds, in another 20 pounds some
lese," and have sold it one shilling a bushel "better cheape than itt
did cost."

(3) Kent: Shepway, Vol. 187, 40. The parishes have provided a store of
corn for their own inhabitants.

(4) Suffolk: The Liberty of St Ethelred's, Vol. 187, 10. A supply
of corn was to be brought from Norfolk and sold to the poor 4_s._ a
quarter under cost price.

(5) Cambridge: Staploe, Cheveley, Staine and Flendish, Vol. 189, 81,
III.

(6) Berks.: Wantage and Farringdon, Vol. 191, 40, I. and III.

(7) Nottingham: charitable selling under price, Vol. 189, 12.

(8) Surrey: Rye was sold to the "poorer sorte" at 5_s._ the bushel,
_Dom. S. P._, Vol. 182, 7.

It is most probable that the poor were relieved in this way in many
other parishes though the justices' reports may not have been returned
or preserved.

[449] We hear in Nov. 1630 of Ireland that "that kingdome is for the
present so plentifully stored w^{th} corne that besides the feeding
of itselfe it may also in some measure supply the necessity of this
realme," _Privy Council Register_. In Cornwall, Flint and Hereford also
there was plenty of grain (_D. S. P._, Chas. I., Vol. 176, No. 57, Vol.
184, No. 61, Vol. 183, 37) while the justices of Agbrigg report that
"Lancashire is a county this year able to help its neighbours."

[Sidenote: _d._ Other special methods of providing food for the poor.]

Sometimes other plans were adopted. The owners and dealers of corn were
expected to contribute to the need of their less fortunate neighbours.
At Reading the corn masters set apart a sack in every load to serve
for the poor at twelvepence a bushel under the market rate[450]. It
would seem that some allowance was usually made by dealers in corn, for
another dealer who was a victim of a riot at Woodchurch states that out
of ten quarters he left five to be sold to the poor[451].

[450] _Dom. State Papers_, Chas. I., Vol. 182, 81.

[451] _Ib._, Vol. 191, 4. See below for the custom of the badgers at
Chipping Wycombe.

Other expedients of this kind were adopted; in Devonshire the children
of the poor were billetted on those able to give relief[452], and at
Maidstone the town baked the bread and gave loaves to the day labourers
and poorest inhabitants[453]. Three of the hundreds of Cambridgeshire
tried a still more organised plan: "the poorer sort had weekly corne
delivered to them at home at twelvepence in the bushell in the least
under the market prices[454]."

[452] _Ib._, 189, 5.

[453] _Ib._, 186, 74.

[454] _Ib._, 189, 75, Whittlesford, Chilford and Radfield.

[Sidenote: 2. Evidence as to success or failure of the corn
regulations.]

We have very varied opinions as to the success or failure of the
organisation for supplying the poor with corn. The justices in several
instances state that the search raised prices, and ask that a second
search may not be made[455]. In a few cases they say the regulation
of the markets was injurious. The most decided of these is an account
from Edwinstree and Odsey, "And we humbly conceaue that o^r strickt
lookeing to the marketts by o^rselves and others, very sufficient and
diligent supervis^{ors}, whom we haue imploied w^{th} a great deale
of care in these businesses is an occacion that the marketts are
the smaller, the corne dearer and new shifts and devises are found
out[456]." In the autumn of 1631 inquiries as to the cause of the
scarcity were instituted, and the Bridport authorities candidly replied
that it was owing to the interference of the justices[457]. But perhaps
the most interesting protest is that from Chipping Wycombe. It was a
town on the borders of Buckinghamshire, which was largely inhabited
by dealers in corn and was the market for the neighbouring parts of
Oxfordshire and Berkshire. After the instructions of the Privy Council
had been followed, only a quarter of the usual quantity was brought
to the market. The dealers, the Mayor tells us, lost heavily because
the price of meal had been fixed by the Lord Mayor, and both they and
the farmers were disgusted at the lowering of prices in other parts of
the country. Formerly the badgers had set aside sacks for the poor,
and the farmers and others had provided stores for them. This they now
refused to do, but the justices did their best and themselves sold to
the poor under the market rates[458]. The dislike of the orders is very
apparent in this report, but it bears witness to the fact that they
were sometimes successful, since prices had been lowered in consequence
in other parts of the country. But as Chipping Wycombe was inhabited
largely by corn-dealers, and as it drew its supplies from other
counties, the orders failed there, and the fact that Chipping Wycombe
was such a town may have been not without its influence on the making
of history, for John Hampden, we are told, was one of the justices
present who witnessed the distress of this disastrous market-day. It
was not a position in which he would judge favourably of the effects
of governmental interference.

[455] _Dom. S. P._, Chas. I., Vol. 189, Nos. 11, 39, 92.

[456] _Ib._, Vol. 186, No. 98.

[457] _Ib._ Vol. 203, No. 30.

[458] _Ib._ Vol. 177, No. 50. See above.

Still the balance of evidence is in favour of the orders. When they
were first put in force they seem to have had a considerable effect in
lowering the price. Many of the reports sent in during the last half of
December and beginning of January tell us that this was the case[459],
though after the beginning of the year prices again rose, because the
corn was wanted for seed as well as for food. However even as late as
April 30th a report from the district of Horncastle in Lincolnshire
informs us that the writers have ordered the markets to be furnished
every week with a particular quantity, and that the price of oatmeal,
which was the chief food of the poor in that part of the country, had
been lowered from eight groats to one shilling and tenpence[460].

[459] _Dom. S. P._, Chas. I., Vol. 177. Contains reports between
Dec. 15th and 30th, 1630, and the following state that prices have
lessened:--

Dec. 20th, No. 29. Anderfield etc., Co. Somerset prices decrease.

Dec. 21st, No. 31. Eight hundreds of York. Wheat 7_s._ and 6_s._ 6_d._
where formerly 9_s._ 6_d._

Dec. 21st, No. 32. Hundred of Lexden etc. Essex, "So as whereas before
there was a great scarcitie and want of graine in every market and the
price every-daie risinge nowe by these endeav^{rs} the markets are
fully served w^{th}out any want and the prices of corne decreasinge."

Dec. 24th, No. 43. Dunmow etc. Essex. By means of "princely care" wheat
has fallen from 8_s._ 6_d._ to 7_s._

Similar reports occur from Jan. 1 to 14th, 1630/1, _D. S. P._, Vol.
182, No. 2, 7, 39, 81.

In 1623 the approval of the justices expressly concerns the suppression
of alehouses.

Feb. 14th, 1623, the Mayor of Launcester states that the price of a
bushel of wheat has fallen from 12_s._ to 10_s._ and that the quantity
of barley brought to market has doubled. (_Cal. of State Papers._)

The Mayor of Liverpool also reports that much good has been done by the
suppression of alehouses. _Ib._ 20th Feb. 1623.

[460] _D. S. P._, Chas. I., Vol. 189, 58.

There are other statements of the same kind[461], but one of the most
strongly expressed of these is from the justices of Suffolk, "We giue
y^r lo(rdshi)ps many humble thanks for your great fauours shewed unto
vs and to the whole state of this county in these necessiteouse times
by those most prudent, compassionate and charitable considerations
deliuered in your bookes of directions and sent vnto vs w^{ch} we
haue w^{th} our uttermost endeauours laboured in euery parte to see
accomplished as well by o^rselues as others. And we must acknowledge
with o^r and the countryes great thankfulnesse unto y^r lo(rdshi)ps
that y^e benefit w^{ch} hereof hath arisen hath bine beyonde all
expectation inestemable and of wonderful effect[462]."

[461] _D. S. P._, Chas. I., Vol. 187, 22; Vol. 189, 39. The High
Sheriff of Suffolk states that "much good haue ensued."

[462] _Dom. S. P._, Chas. I., Vol. 187, 12.

But the strongest argument that on the whole these measures were
beneficial is to be found in the fact that they were enforced
throughout the country by the justices with very few protests. The
justices would as a rule be landlords and generally corn owners; the
regulations were against their interests, and, unless they had thought
that they contributed to the public welfare, they would have complained
more and performed less. When they thought a course objectionable they
said so: many of them did not approve of a second search of the stocks
of corn[463]; in several instances they said that the order to prevent
millers from buying corn was not beneficial, because the millers sold
in small quantities to the poor who did not come to market[464]. But
the rest of the orders concerning corn were enforced nearly always
without comment or with approval.

[463] _Ib._ Vol. 188, 92, Vol. 189, 12, 29.

[464] _Cal. of State Papers_, Jan. 27, 1623, _Dom. S. P._, Chas. I.,
Vol. 182, Nos. 2, 1 and 67.

[Sidenote: 3. Reasons for the adoption of the corn regulations.]

It is not difficult to see reasons for the success of such an
organisation. Corn fluctuated violently in price because of the
narrowness of the area from which the supplies came. Even with our
own worldwide supply a corner in wheat has been attempted and for a
time maintained. When little corn was imported into England, and even
counties were largely self-supporting, farmers might easily raise the
price by keeping back their corn from market[465].

[465] The following examples show that prices varied considerably in
different parts of the country at the same date.

       _Dom. S. P._, Chas. I.         Price of bushel of wheat.     Barley.

  Cornwall, Feb. 5th, Vol. 184, 16    9_d._ a gall. or 6/-        5¼_d._ 3/6
                                      for eight galls.            for eight

  Flint, Feb. 10, Vol. 184. 61        5/- a bushel                3/6 a bushel

  Kingsbridge and Dodbrooke Devon,    8/- for 13 galls.           5/8 for 13 or
    1630/1, Vol. 184, 3               or 4/11 for eight           3/7 for eight galls.

  Edwinsey and Odsey, Feb. 18th       8/- a bushel                5/2 a bushel
    Vol. 185, 27

  Appletree, Derby, Feb. 21st,        8/- do.                     6/- do.
    Vol. 185, 41

  Bulmer, N. Riding, April 26th       6/- to 7/- do.              3/6 to 4/4 do.
    Vol. 189, 35

  Westminster, April 28th, Vol.       12/8 1st qu., 11/8 2nd
    189, 48

But the great price was not always the worst of the trouble. The
justices of Devonshire tell us that corn could not be had for money,
and the statement is confirmed by Fitz-Geffrie in his _Curse of
Corne-horders_, "O miserable condition! the poore man is put to a
double labour, first to get a little money for Corne and then to get a
little corne for money & this last is the hardest labour; he might haue
earned almost halfe a bushell while hee runnes about begging to buy
halfe a pecke[466]."

[466] Fitz Geffrie, _Curse of Corne-Horders_ (Printed 1631) p. 37.

We must remember the narrowness of the market; the excessive
fluctuations in price, and the difficulty of finding a seller willing
to sell a small quantity of grain, before we can criticise fairly the
organisation which was established during these years of high-priced
corn.

In any case the corn orders of the Government seem to have helped
to maintain the public peace. In 1527, in 1551, in 1587, in 1597,
and in 1623 the rise in the price of corn immediately occasioned
disorder[467], and even in 1630 attacks were made on the carts carrying
corn, and there were other signs of disturbance[468]. But in this
last season of scarcity there was no serious outburst. The orders of
the Government probably relieved the distress and certainly helped to
convince the people that their rulers were trying to help them.

[467] See above pp. 48, 85, 129, 145.

[468] As early as Nov. 18, 1630, the justices of Berkshire were uneasy
and ordered the constables of several parishes not to allow the people
to assemble, to charge the churchwardens and overseers to double the
poor rates; to forbid the brewers to serve the alehouse keepers and the
alehouse keepers to sell ale at all. (_Cal. of State Papers_, Nov. 18,
1630.)

In Kent the Sheriff reports signs of disorder; the people, he said,
fell on the carriers of corn and the following lines of doggerel were
picked up in the minister's porch:--

    The corne is so dear
    I dout mani will starve this yeare
    If you see not to this
    Sum of you will speed amis
    Our souls they are dear
    For our bodyes have sume ceare
    Before we arise
    Less will safise
    Note. The poor there is more
    Than goes from dore to dore etc.

      _Cal. of State Papers_, Nov. 22nd, 1630.

There were several attacks on carts at Newbury and elsewhere; and there
were rioters at Gloucester.

[Sidenote: 4. Bearing of the scarcity measures on the history of poor
relief.]

[Sidenote: _a._ The training of the justices.]

The organisation for supplying the poor with corn in 1631 is both
indirectly and directly connected with the history of poor relief.
We have already seen that the orders for supplying corn seem to have
suggested the orders for the ordinary relief of the poor, and that
both sets of orders were worked by similar methods. The season of
1630-1 is the first in which the administrators seem to have properly
fulfilled their duties. Then the commands of the Government seem to
have been vigilantly enforced. This was not always easily accomplished,
rebellious inhabitants were coerced, negligent justices were
punished[469]. But on the whole the justices seem to have worked with
zeal, and the success obtained by them during this exceptional crisis
must have made it easier for them to cope with the relief of the poor
in more ordinary times.

[469] Thus at Doncaster engrossers of corn were made to sell their
stocks in bushels and peckes 7_s._ a load under the market price.
_Dom. State Papers_, Chas. I., Vol. 189, 8. III. At Ipswich, Edw. Man
refused to bring his corn to market when ordered to do so and was made
to submit and to sell sixpence a bushel under the market rate. _Privy
Council Reg._ 26th Dec. 1630, f. 256 and 272. Conners and bakers of
Colchester also were guilty of the same offence and were punished in
the same manner, _D. S. P._, Vol. 184, 30. At Uppingham, an Edmund
Wright refused to pay his rate and if still refractory was to be
ordered to appear before the Privy Council. _Privy Council Reg._, 24th
Feb., 1631/2. Two justices of Stamford were removed from their office
and one was sent to the Fleet because they opposed the Book of Orders.
3rd Dec., 1631, f. 286.

[Sidenote: _b._ The standard of comfort of the poorer classes.]

Moreover the direct relief afforded by the corn stores must be taken
into account when we attempt to estimate the amount of comfort enjoyed
by the manual workers in the reign of Charles I.

Prof. Rogers has compared the condition of the labouring population at
different times by estimating the amount of food which could be bought
by a labourer receiving average wages in each period. This method
of comparison leads him to the conclusion that the majority of the
population were in a very miserable condition before the outbreak of
the Civil War[470].

[470] _Hist. of Agric. and Prices_, Vol. V. p. 592.

But in 1630-1, and to some extent also in 1623, labourers did not
pay the market price for their food, and this fact must modify any
conclusion derived from such a source so far as the reigns of James
I. and Charles I. are concerned. Not only was corn sold under price
from public granaries and stores, but it is probable that whenever
arrangements were made to serve the labourers at home the prices were
somewhat reduced, as the sellers would then be saved the trouble of
taking the corn to market, and the expense of paying the market tolls.

Moreover it has often been pointed out that the relative comfort of
any class can be better ascertained if we consider the earnings of the
family rather than those of the individual[471]. This was a period in
which women could easily obtain work in spinning and when children were
apprenticed at an early age, and so required little support from their
parents. For these reasons it seems likely that the labourer of the
reign of Charles I. would be better off than the amount of his wages
would lead us to suppose, and this estimate is confirmed by the scale
of diet fixed for the boys in the Children's Hospital of Norwich in
1632.

[471] W. Cunningham, _Growth of English Industry and Commerce_, Vol.
II. p. 688.

The boys in the hospital were between the ages of ten and fourteen. For
dinner they were always to have six ounces of bread and a pint of beer:
three days in the week they had also a pint of pottage and six ounces
of beef, and on the remaining four an ounce of butter and two of
cheese. For supper they had always six ounces of bread, a pint of beer,
an ounce of butter and two of cheese, and for breakfast every day three
ounces of bread, half an ounce of butter and half a pint of beer[472].
As this represents the food of the destitute orphans of Norwich it is
not likely to be much better than the usual standard of the poorest
class, and seems to compare very favourably with the food of a boy
in the same class in our own time. The ordinary standard of living
thus does not appear to be miserable, but the poor must have suffered
terribly, if there had been no exceptional relief, whenever there was
no work for them to do, and when corn was double the usual price.

[472] This table of food was approved by the city rulers on 30th June,
1632 (Norwich Court Books). The keeper of the orphanage was sold wheat
and rye from the granary at 12_s._ a combe and was given £4. 6_s._
8_d._ for each child every year. He had also their work and certain
allowances for their clothing.

It is these fluctuations that were the chief source of misery, and
by lessening their effect the scarcity measures of the time were of
enormous importance to the whole of the labouring class.

But relief in times of emergency was afforded to the needy in other
times of exceptional distress.

[Sidenote: 5. Provision of fuel for the poor in Winter.]

In Winter fuel was provided. Thus at St Albans, wood was bought for
the poor in the reign of Queen Elizabeth[473]. In London there was a
coal yard before 1590, and early in the reign of James I. the City
authorities obtained permission to import four thousand chaldron of
"sea cole" free of duty for the purpose of supplying those in need of
help[474]. Payments for fuel formed part of the regular organisation
at Norwich[475], and directions to secure a supply to the poor of
their district are contained also in the orders to the overseers of
1623[476]. This provision is another illustration of the fact that a
great deal of the relief given was designed to protect the people from
excessive fluctuations in price.

[473] _Corporation Records of St Albans_, A. E. Gibbs, June 10th, 1587,
p. 28.

[474] _Remembrancia_, I. No. 586, II. No. 255 and VII. No. 193. In
October 1630, the store of coal was larger than in former years. _Ib._
VII. No. 50.

[475] "Maioris Booke for the Poore" Norwich.

[476] See above chapter IX.

[Sidenote: 6. Help in times of sickness and plague.]

Methods of relieving the poor in times of sickness were also numerous.
The Great Plague of London was not an isolated attack; throughout
the seventeenth century few years pass without an outbreak in one of
the large towns. Special orders were drawn up to prevent the spread
of infection; watchmen were appointed to guard stricken houses, and
the inmates for the time had to be supported by the community[477].
The cost of this severely taxed local resources. At Cambridge we
hear that in 1630, 2800 claimed relief and only seven score were
able to contribute. In this case a brief was issued authorising
collections from other parts[478], and London and Norwich sent generous
contributions[479]. One town seems to have helped another frequently
when this scourge broke out: New Sarum sent aid to London, Norwich to
Yarmouth, and both New Sarum and Bury thanked the Londoners for the
help they had themselves received under like circumstances[480].

[477] In 1638 at Reading 4_d._ a day was allowed to each person shut
up in the Conduit Close and 3_d._ a day to each of those confined in
Minster Street. _Reading Records_, Vol. III. p. 421.

[478] The brief was issued 25th June, 1630. Cooper's _Annals of
Cambridge_, III. p. 223.

[479] Cooper, Vol. III. p. 225. Some thousands of pounds were collected
in London.

[480] New Sarum contributed £52 to London. _Remembrancia_, VIII. 180.
October, 1636. Bury, _Ib._, VIII. 207, April, 1638. Norwich, see
_Norwich Court Books_, 4th Feb., 1626.

Pest houses were often established; at Reading eight were built,
and we hear of their erection in Norwich, London, Cambridge and
Windsor[481]. The way the funds were raised for the plague-stricken
poor of Windsor is one of the many illustrations of the fact that
private charity and public rates were often used for the same purposes
and administered by the same officials. The site for the pest house
was given by an alderman, some of the money was raised for the relief
of the infected poor "by way of taxation," part was given by gentlemen
of the neighbourhood, and the rest was probably paid out of the town
chest[482]. At Hitchen and in other places relief was given to the
plague-stricken by means of the poor law organisation[483].

[481] Reading: 1639. More than £190 is spent in building eight pest
houses. _Records of Reading_, Vol. III. p. 454.

Norwich: _Court Books_. 12th May, 1630: a pest house was built. 24th
June, 1630: a separate pest house was built by the Dutchmen. 14th May,
1632: two more pest houses ordered to be made.

London: _Remembrancia_, 7, 19.

Cambridge: _Cooper's Annals_, III. p. 226.

[482] Windsor: Tighe and Davis, _Annals of Windsor_, Vol. II., p. 52,
1604. The site of the building was given by Thos. Aldem an Alderman.
Also "There was collected within the Towne for ye reliefe of infected
people by way of taxation £25. 11_s._ 1_d._ Given by divers gentlemen
and other neighbours £29. 6_s._ 6_d._ and paid them over and above
these two somes £17. 5_s._ 2_d._"

[483] The justices of Hitchen thus report their expenses in time of
plague. "By the ouerseers of the poore in this tyme of y^e visitation
128^{li}. Besides the charges of six watchmen and one officer with them
euerie night, And besides dailye reliefe from the houses of the able
and welldisposed. And xx^{li} taxed by us upon the halfe hundred the
greatest parte wherof is not yet payd in. And besides the charges in
setting of poore on worke etc." _D. S. P._, Chas. I., Vol. 349, No. 70.

The Privy Council frequently made orders connected with the plague.
Sometimes they ordered the erection of pest houses, sometimes a special
collection. In Grantham and Worcester the rich fled from the infected
town, so that government was at a standstill; the absentees were
required to pay double rates and, if necessary, to return and help
govern the town[484]. At another time the paper-makers in Suffolk were
prevented from working because of the plague, and a special collection
was ordered for them[485]. All these orders illustrate the paternal
nature of the Privy Council government, and also seem to show that in
social matters it was exercised in favour of the poor.

[484] _Privy Council Reg._ 22nd April, 1636.

[485] _Ib._, 6th and 27th Nov. 1638.

But not only in time of plague was provision made for the sick. At
Norwich it was part of the regular organisation for the poor; in London
St Thomas's and St Bartholomew's hospitals were already in existence,
and in most towns there were numerous lazar houses. In some places the
help provided was even greater than that of to-day; a town physician
was appointed especially to look after the poor. Newcastle adopted
this plan in the reign of Elizabeth, and the practice was continued
down to the time of the Civil War, and in 1629 a "learned physician"
was engaged by the Mayor and Corporation of Barnstaple to give advice
gratis to the poor[486]. This happened just at the time when, as we
have seen, there was great activity in matters connected with the poor,
and is an illustration of the fact that the duties of the seventeenth
century municipality were very various, and that even in 1629 the town
authorities were sometimes pioneers in matters concerning the poor.

[486] 1599: the Town's physician was appointed at Newcastle. _Welford,
Newcastle and Gateshead_, III. p. 132. Seven years earlier a surgeon
obtained by grant of the mayor 40_s._ as his accustomed fee for helping
to cure the maimed poor folk. In 1599, a physician was paid his
quarter's fee and in later years was known as the town physician.

[Sidenote: 7. Contributions to sufferers from fire.]

Fire was another way in which sudden loss was caused to large numbers
of people. Houses were still built largely of wood and often very
close together. Whole towns were not infrequently destroyed. Tiverton
suffered twice in this way, and the suddenness of the calamity to so
flourishing a town seems to have especially struck men's imagination.
"He which at one a clocke was worth fiue thousand pound and as the
Prophet saith drunke his Wine in bowles of fine Siluer plate, had
not by two a clocke so much as a woodden dish left to eate his meate
in, nor a house to couer his sorrowfull head"[487]. In the second
destruction of 1612 three hundred of the poor people were boarded in
the shire, and collections to rebuild the town were made throughout
the country. Similar disasters happened to several other towns, to
Dorchester in 1613 and Hertford in 1637, and like collections were made
for them among charitable people.

[487] Pamphlet of 1598 reprinted in Harding's _Tiverton_, Appendix, p.
7.

1632: "Paid Mr Henderson the townes physician his ½ yeares stipend
due at lady-day 1632, 20_l._" A payment of £10 was also made in 1647,
to "doctor Samuel Rand the townes physition." M. A. Richardson's
_Tracts_, Vol. III. p. 47. Extracts from the municipal accounts of
Newcastle. Barnstaple, Nov. 24th, 1629: "Dr Symes a learned Physician
engaged by Mayor and Corporation to be resident in town and give advice
gratis to the poor at £20 per annum for two years to be paid out of
town stock if not raised by subscriptions." Wyot's Diary, Barnstaple
Records, _North Devon Herald_, April 21, 1881.

Relief was also given to individuals who suffered loss from fire,
sometimes by means of authorised collections and sometimes out of the
public funds[488]. Thus in the North Riding £20 was paid to twelve
persons of Thornton and Farmanby, on account of their losses caused by
fire[489].

[488] Circular letters or briefs were often issued by the Council
authorising collections for the sufferers. W. A. Bewes, _Church
Briefs_, p. 97.

[489] _North Riding Records_, Vol. IV. p. 27. Jan. 16, 1634/5.

[Sidenote: 8. Characteristics of seventeenth century poor relief.]

Thus in the first half of the seventeenth century relief in times of
emergency forms a considerable part of the assistance given to people
in distress.

[Sidenote: _a._ Little distinction between paupers and non-paupers.]

That provided in years of high priced corn was not distributed only
to those who were usually paupers but to the whole of the labouring
class; that afforded in times of fire or sickness affected all classes
of the community. There was thus much less difference between paupers
and the rest of the community than there is to-day. All classes were
relieved because poor relief was originally part of a paternal system
of government under which the rulers regarded the maintenance of the
usual prosperity of every class as a part of their duties. There is a
curious case of landlord and farmer relief during the season of plenty
in 1619. It was then stated that of late years there had been so much
corn that the farmers were impoverished. A letter was therefore sent to
the justices of every county ordering them to confer concerning some
fit place where a magazine might be provided for storing a quantity of
corn. The reason for this is stated to be that it is the "care of the
state to provyd as well to keepe the price of corne in tymes of plenty
at such reasonable rates as may afford encouragemt and lively good to
the farmer and husbandman as to moderate the rates thereof in time of
scarcitie for the releefe of the poorer folke"[490]. Few regulations
could make it clearer than this, that the paternal measures of the
Government were not confined to one particular class, but affected the
whole of the community.

[490] _Privy Council Registers_, 19 Jan. 1619/20.

[Sidenote: _b._ Little distinction between relief afforded by
voluntary donations and that provided by poor rates.]

The distinction between paupers and non-paupers therefore was much
less clear than it is to-day, and it is also true that the distinction
between voluntary contributions and compulsory poor rates was much less
rigidly defined. The supply of the poor with corn is nearly always
stated to have been a voluntary measure, but it was carried out under
very considerable pressure from the justices. Sometimes the pressure
amounted to compulsion. Thus in the Sarum division of Wiltshire some
gave "franklie and freely good quantities of their store" to the poor
but others were "wilfull." The justices "terrified them a little w^{th}
conventing them before the Lords of the Counsell and then they seemed
very willing and tractable"[491]. It is difficult to say therefore how
far the corn charities of the time were voluntary and how much they
were compulsory. There was also a close connection between private and
public charity in other forms of relief.

[491] _D. S. P._, Chas. I., Vol. 182, No. 2. I.

Probably in every town there were numbers of endowed charities
controlled by the municipal officers or by overseers or by some public
or semi-public authorities, which were practically a part of the same
system as that enforced by law. Such were the four royal hospitals of
London and the hospitals of Gloucester and Norwich. Such also were
the many almshouses under the management of corporations, as were the
almshouses founded respectively by Leche and by Kendrick at Reading,
and the many charities for apprenticing poor children and lending
money to poor tradesmen, which we shall afterwards consider in detail.
Sometimes the connection was closer still, and the workhouse like the
Free Library of to-day might be partly provided by private generosity
and partly by public rates. Such was the case with the Barnstaple
workhouse and the Jersey school of Newark[492].

[492] Barnstaple Records, _North Devon Herald_, Feb. 24th, 1881. Mr
John Penrose gave £200 to employ the poor in Bridewell. Shelton's
_Hist. of Newark_, pp. 38, 387.

The relief of the poor in times of emergency thus brings into
prominence two of the main features of the poor relief of the time.
First, that the public compulsory system was developed from a voluntary
system and that in the seventeenth century voluntary and public poor
relief were closely connected. Secondly, that the poor relief of the
time was intimately connected with the general system of government
under which all classes were compelled by Government to do their duties
and any class might be relieved that for the time failed to obtain its
usual degree of prosperity.




CHAPTER XI.

METHODS OF RELIEF, 1597-1644 (_continued_).

B. _Ordinary Relief._

    α. Impotent poor.
  1. Almshouses and endowed charities.
    (_a_) Old endowments which remained unchanged through the Reformation.
    (_b_) Old endowments regranted to the Corporation or other public body.
    (_c_) Fresh endowments.
    (_d_) Pensions and gifts from endowed charities.
  2. Provision for the old from compulsory rates.
    (_a_) Relief from the county by pensions paid to soldiers and sailors
and by hospitals maintained by county funds.
    (_b_) Relief from the parish by pensions paid to the destitute, by the
grant of a house, or by arrangements for free board and lodging in the
house of some parishioner.
    β. Children.
  3. Provision for children by apprenticeship.
    (_a_) To masters. (_b_) To the masters of the Bridewells or industrial
schools of the time.
  4. Schools for little children and orphanages.
    γ. Able-bodied poor.
  5. Relief given to prisoners.
  6. Provision of funds to provide work for the unemployed.
  7. Methods of providing work.
     (_a_) Stocks used to employ the poor in their homes or elsewhere.
     (_b_) Introduction of new trades.
     (_c_) Workhouses and Jersey schools.
     (_d_) Bridewells.
     (_e_) Emigration.
     (_f_) Pressure on employers.
     (_g_) Advancement of capital without interest.


We have seen how the poor were relieved in times of special emergency;
we will now examine the kind of help that was bestowed upon those
classes of poor who in almost every community were more or less
constantly in need of assistance. We will notice first the relief
given to the impotent and aged poor; secondly, the measures adopted to
provide for destitute children; and lastly, the methods used to find
work for the unemployed or to suppress vagrants.

[Sidenote: α. The impotent poor.]

[Sidenote: 1. Almshouses and endowed charities.]

[Sidenote: _a._ Old endowments which remained unchanged through the
Reformation.]

The method of relieving the impotent poor differed very considerably
from that with which we are familiar. The workhouses of the seventeenth
century were mainly places for people who could work, the aged and
impotent poor were often relieved by almshouses controlled by public
and by private authorities, but founded and maintained by private
liberality. It was indeed an age in which almshouses or hospitals as
they were often called abounded. Probably there were nearly as many
in existence then as there are to-day, in spite of the fact that our
population has increased sixfold. Some of these hospitals were old
endowments that had survived the Reformation; others had been dissolved
with the other religious houses and regranted to the municipal
authorities of the place to which they belonged; many more were founded
during the reigns of Elizabeth, James I., and Charles I.

The well-known Hospital of St Cross at Winchester is a good example of
an old foundation that has had a continuous existence from its first
endowment in the middle ages until the present day. The modern tourist,
like the wayfarer of mediæval times, may partake of the refreshment
provided by its ancient regulations, and may still receive his bread
and beer like a seventeenth century beggar. But it has also been an
almshouse since the time of Henry II. By the Charter of Foundation
"thirteen poor men, feeble and so reduced in strength, that they can
scarcely, or not at all, support themselves without other aid, shall
remain in the same hospital constantly; to whom necessary clothing,
provided by the Prior of the Establishment, shall be given, and beds
fit for their infirmities; and daily a good loaf of wheaten bread
of the weight of five measures, three dishes at dinner and one for
supper, and drink in sufficient quantity[493]." This hospital was
not dissolved by Henry VIII. but continued under its old regulations
throughout the Reformation. Laud ordered inquiries to be made
concerning it shortly after 1627, and the thirteen pensioners were
then maintained with full allowances[494]. Many hospitals survived the
dissolution besides St Cross and remained in private hands; a few like
St Giles's, Hereford, or St Bartholomew's at Sandwich had been governed
by the town-rulers from the time of their foundation[495], and these
for the most part retained their old endowments and remained under
municipal management.

[493] _The Hospital of St Cross_, Rev. L. M. Humbert, p. 14.
Translation of the Charter of Foundation.

[494] _The Hospital of St Cross_, pp. 38 and 41 seq. There were then
belonging to the hospital besides the Master and 13 brethren, 12
out-brethren, 28 sisters and 2 probationers.

[495] See Chapter I.

[Sidenote: 1 _b_. Old endowments regranted to the Corporation or other
public body.]

Other hospitals were regranted to the Corporations of their respective
cities and towns soon after the dissolution in the same way as St
Bartholomew's had been given to the City of London. Such was the case
with St Bartholomew's of Gloucester. Queen Elizabeth stipulated that
some of the payments formerly made by the Crown should be remitted,
but placed the rest of the revenues in the hands of the Corporation on
condition that a physician and surgeon and forty poor people should be
there maintained[496]. Two other of the ancient hospitals of Gloucester
came into the hands of the Corporation. One of these, St Margaret's
Hospital, provided for ten poor men in 1562, and was then governed
by the town authorities; the other, St Mary Magdalen, was granted to
the city both by Queen Elizabeth and King James, and was called King
James's Hospital[497]. Even if a hospital came into private hands it
often returned to its original purpose. Sentiment as to its rightful
use was probably very strong in the case of any institution which
had been founded to do a work which obviously needed doing. Thus
Kineburgh's, another of the old hospitals of Gloucester, had been sold
at the dissolution to a Mr Thomas Bell, and was afterwards refounded
by him and placed under the care of the Corporation. His donation was
confirmed by Queen Elizabeth, and during the reign of James several
other small endowments were added by various donors for the maintenance
of the poor there[498].

[496] Rudder's _Gloucestershire_, p. 202.

[497] _Ib._, pp. 186-7.

[498] Rudder's _Gloucestershire_, p. 203.

Gloucester was perhaps especially fortunate in retaining so many of
its old endowments, but elsewhere similar arrangements were made.
St Giles's of Norwich, St Leonard's of Launceston, St Edmund's of
Gateshead, St Thomas's and St Catherine's of York, St Mary Magdalen's
of King's Lynn, and Trinity Hospital of Bristol were all old
foundations which, during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, came
into the hands of the corporation of the town to which they severally
belong[499]. St Giles's Hospital of Norwich may be taken as an example
of these re-established hospitals. According to the Letters Patent of
Edward VI. it was granted to the Mayor and Corporation of Norwich, and
was to be called the House of God or the House of the Poor: forty men
and four matrons were to be provided for; they were to receive bed
and bed-clothes, bread, meat, drink and firing. The pensioners were
not appointed for life, but were removable from week to week or from
day to day[500]. This hospital therefore was very much like a modern
workhouse, except that it was supported by endowments or by voluntary
subscriptions.

[499] St Leonard's of Launceston is an interesting example of the way
in which the old hospitals for lepers came to be used for the poor.

Philip and Mary granted the hospital to the Corporation for the use of
leprous and infirm people.

James I. repeats this grant and adds that "for default of leprous
persons in the hospital aforesaid that it be and shall be lawful" for
the mayor and aldermen etc. to receive the rents for the support of the
poor. _Char. Com. Rep._ 32, Pt. 1, p. 406.

1610. King James I. refounded St Edmund's of Gateshead. Sykes's _Local
Records_, I. p. 84.

St Thomas's and St Catherine's, York, also came under the control of
the city. Drake's _Eboracum_, pp. 246, 247.

St Mary Magdalen, King's Lynn, was originally founded partly for
lepers; its revenues were taken away in the time of Edward VI., but a
few of the poor were maintained there by the Corporation. Its lands
were restored by James I. and it was placed under the care of the town
rulers. Mackerell, _Lynn Regis_, p. 194.

The property of Trinity Hospital, Bristol, since the time of Queen
Elizabeth has been conveyed in trust to members of the Corporation of
the city of Bristol. _Reports of the Charity Commissioners_, VI. p. 506.

[500] Letters Patent, 1 Edw. VI. No. 54. _Charters, Oaths and Charities
of the City of Norwich_, p. 50.

Occasionally these ancient charities came to be managed by the vestry.
Thus in Bristol there were three old endowments of this sort. Redcliffe
almshouse was supposed to have been established about 1440 by the
famous Bristol merchant William Canninge; the Temple Gate almshouse
and Burton's were probably foundations of an even earlier date. The
two former were governed by the vestry of St Mary, Redcliffe, and long
before 1821 had become simply houses in which aged paupers were placed
by the overseers[501]. Burton's almshouse was governed by the vestry
of St Thomas's parish, and was used as an almshouse from which paupers
were not excluded. These institutions had thus then become part of the
compulsory and legal system of poor relief rather than of the voluntary
charity which existed by its side.

[501] _Charity Com. Rep._ 7, pp. 204, 205, 234.

[Sidenote: 1 _c_. Fresh endowments.]

But not only were there many old foundations for helping the aged poor,
but the century from 1550 to 1650 was itself the great time of the
foundation of new almshouses. It is rare to find a town of any size
in which some institutions of this kind were not established during
these years, though in country parishes they were not so frequent. They
were governed in many different ways, but generally by some public
body or by some set of men closely connected with the authorities
who were responsible for the administration of poor-relief. Some
were governed by the Corporation like the small almshouse founded by
Fox at Beverley. Many resembled the Temple Hospital at Bristol; this
was endowed by Sir Thomas White and was vested in trustees who were
members of the Corporation. A few were managed by merchant or craft
companies associated with the government of the town; such was the case
with the Merchants' Hospital of Bristol and Dame Owen's almshouses
in Islington. Others were in the hands of private trustees sometimes
connected with the founder's family, at other times with his position.
The Archbishops of Canterbury were generally associated with some of
the favourite charities of the time. Grindal provided a stock for
setting the poor to work, Abbot a workhouse, Laud apprenticeship
endowments, and Whitgift an almshouse at Croydon for twenty-eight poor
people, the government of which he vested in his successors in the see
of Canterbury. These hospitals were usually filled by the aged and
impotent of the poorer classes. But occasionally they also supplied
the wants of the poor in a better social position. The Charterhouse of
Colonel Newcome fame was a foundation of the reign of King James, and
supplied a refuge for eighty poor gentlemen, merchants, soldiers, or
mariners.

Altogether the almshouses of the time formed a very important part of
the provision for the poor. In some towns like that of Hereford[502]
they were extremely numerous. Other places like Morton Hampstead seem
to have established a public almshouse for the poor, but as a rule
these institutions were privately endowed, and the help given by them
was thus free from the sting that is attached to legal and compulsory
charity.

[502] There were endowments for at least ten almshouses in Hereford in
1642.

  I. St Ethelbert's, an old foundation for ten poor people in the hands
  of the Cathedral authorities.

  II. Sick Man's Hospital. A foundation partly managed by the Corporation
  and partly by the Vestry.

  III. St Giles's, an old endowment in the hands of the Corporation.

  IV, V, VI. Kerry's, Williams', and Price's Hospitals, endowed during
  the reigns of Elizabeth and James I., and governed by the Corporation.

  VII. Lingen almshouses founded 1609.                             }
                                                                   }
  VIII. Coningsby Hospital founded 1617 for eleven old soldiers,   }Under
  mariners, or serving men.                                        }private
                                                                   }management.
  IX. Mary Price's almshouses, 1636, for six poor widows or single }
  women.                                                           }

  X. Weaver's almshouses, 1641. Under management of parochial authorities
  of All Saints'. _Charity Commissioners' Rep._ 32, Pt. II., pp. 6-56.

[Sidenote: 1 _d_. Pensions and gifts from endowed charities.]

But besides the almshouses many other charities were founded to help
the aged poor, some of which have proved of doubtful benefit to their
successors. Many pensions and gifts of small amount were distributed by
public or semi-public bodies. The City Companies of London frequently
received bequests of this kind. Thus the Clothworkers administer the
gift of Sir Thomas Trevor. In 1622 he bequeathed £100 in order that six
poor women might have 20s. a piece in quarterly instalments. At Bristol
every week some one poor widow receives 10_s._ from Mr Whitson's
charity, and two poor householders have 20_s._ each, though neither
widow nor householder can have the gift more than once in the same
year[503].

[503] _Rep._ VI., pp. 253 and 495.

Innumerable smaller charities also exist in particular towns and
parishes ordering the distribution of sixpences and shillings on
particular Sundays or Feasts, or after the hearing of some sermon. Even
more frequently bread charities were established. Thus in Hereford
Cathedral twelve poor people receive a loaf every Saturday, and
sixpence on twelve of the principal feasts and vigils of the year[504].
Sometimes so many poor men or women are "apparelled," or gowns, shirts
and smocks are bought and distributed: more often fuel and wood are
provided[505]. Bequests of this kind are very numerous, but the amount
of relief afforded to each individual is often ridiculously small.
Still the value of money was three or four times greater then than
it is to-day, and a pension of 10_s._ or 20_s._ was a much greater
contribution towards the maintenance of the poor person. Moreover,
parochial authorities and officials of City Companies had comparatively
few people to deal with, and it was possible for them to know something
about the recipients of these charitable doles.

[504] _Ib._ 32, Pt. II., p. 11.

[505] Numerous examples of these bequests occur in the Reports of the
Charity Commissioners. The following may serve as specimens of the
charities of this kind existing in a single parish.

_In St Giles, Reading._ _Char. Com. Report_, 32, pt. I., pp. 131, 132.

_Clothing._ Augustine Knapp, 1602, gave to the churchwardens 20_s._ a
year for ever to be bestowed for the clothing of poor, lame, blind and
impotent people in the parish.

1625. Richard Shaile gave £10 upon trust to buy yearly three shirts
and three smocks worth 2_s._ 6_d._ a piece for three poor aged men and
three poor aged women, chosen by the churchwarden. This gift was lost
before 1688.

_Bread._ 1606. Thos. Deane gave an annual rent of £3 to be bestowed
yearly in good, wholesome, well sized bread and given to the poor
of the town in St Giles's churchyard as might be settled by the
churchwardens and overseers of the poor. The bread was to be given as
follows: yearly upon Christmas Eve, 20 dozen of bread: upon Good Friday
another 20 dozen, and upon Ascension Eve another 20 dozen.

1623. Rich. Aldworth gave another gift of £3 a year for the same
purpose, to be distributed at the same times.

_Money._ In 1614 A. Humphrey Champion had given a gift of £10, the
interest of which was given to poor people. Now lost.

Altogether the number of endowed charities which afforded assistance to
old people was large in the seventeenth century in comparison with the
number of persons who were in need of relief. Moreover, new almshouses
were continually founded throughout this period and until the close
of the century. Probably many of these are in existence to-day, but
there has been no increase at all proportionate to the growth of the
population, while a few of the old institutions like the Redcliffe
almshouse at Bristol have become part of the legal system of relief
while others have disappeared altogether[506].

[506] There is an almshouse in St Just not now occupied. See _Rep._
32, Pt. I., p. 438. In Gloucester also almshouses were founded by a Mr
Hill, Mr Keylock, Mr Pater, and Alderman Thomas Semys. The two last
were in existence in 1643, but are not now distinguishable. Rudder's
_Gloucestershire_, p. 204.

[Sidenote: 2. Provision for the old from compulsory rates.]

[Sidenote: 2 _a_. Relief provided by county funds.]

But although the aged poor were largely relieved by almshouses there
were still many who were provided for by the legal and compulsory
system. Some hospitals were supported by the county funds. There were
several in the North Riding of Yorkshire which were used as almshouses
for the impotent and aged poor and received grants from the County
Treasurer[507].

[507] Sums were paid out of the county funds of the North Riding to
hospitals at New Malton, Old Malton, and Scarborough. _Quarter Sessions
Records, North Riding_, Vol. I. p. 43, Vol. II. p. 183. In 1618/9 New
Malton hospital was dissolved, and pensions were then allotted to the
old and impotent poor there. _Ib._ Jan. 7th, 1618/9.

Aged soldiers and sailors were also provided for not by the parish but
by the county. As we should expect this was found to be a heavy charge
in Devonshire, and the magistrates grumbled at the amount they had to
give for this purpose[508].

[508] _Quarter Sessions from Queen Eliz. to Queen Anne._ A. Hamilton,
p. 17.

[Sidenote: 2 _b_. Relief of the aged by means of pensions from the
parish or by the provisions of houses or free board and lodging.]

More often the aged poor were relieved by the funds raised by the
parish. Two methods seem to have been adopted. The most usual was
what we should now call a system of out-relief. Pensions were granted
varying in amount from threepence to two shillings a week, but
generally about one shilling[509]. Sometimes in addition rent was paid
and often habitations were provided which were built by the overseers
on the waste[510]. But the poor in these were not under any special
control but were allowed to look after themselves in other respects. In
some parishes, however, instead of receiving weekly pensions the poor
were billeted on the rich. In a report from the district of Furness
and Cartmell, one hundred and seventy-six people were relieved in
this manner, and two hundred and eighty-eight by means of pensions.
In this case each parish adopted one method or the other exclusively;
thus in Alythwaite thirty-nine poor were billeted, in Coniston twelve
were provided for by money payments[511]. In other cases the method
of billeting existed as an exceptional practice side by side with the
pension system. Thus in Staplegrove, Somerset, in 1599, after the list
of payments given for the poor, there are the names of two men, each of
whom kept a poor impotent person in his house[512].

[509] See Appendix VII., and also the overseers' returns from East
Barnet and Elstree in 1639, and from Chipping Barnet and Elstree in
Feb. 1636/7. _Dom. State Papers_, Chas. I., Vol. 347, No. 67, and Vol.
418, No. 21.

[510] In the North Riding, at Quarter Sessions orders were frequently
made for the building of houses for particular poor people. Thus in the
Court held April 17th and 18th, 1610, the overseers and churchwardens
of Bagby were commanded "to find or provide Alice Cooke, being a poore
widowe, of a house." _Quarter Sessions Records, North Riding_, Vol. I.
p. 189. On July 20, 1619, also an order was made that the churchwardens
and overseers of Startforth shall provide a convenient dwelling house
for Ellen Winter before Michaelmas. At the same court the overseers of
Easbie were told to collect 82_s._ 10_d._ from various townships in
order to pay for a house for two poor men which had been already built
by order of the justices. _Ib._ Vol. II. p. 211. Like orders continued
to be made through the reign of Charles I. and under the Commonwealth.
_Ib._ Vol. V. pp. 62, 255.

[511] _Dom. S. P._ Chas. I., Vol. 330, No. 90.

[512] See Appendix VII.

The parochial system of the time was therefore mainly a system of
out-relief and sometimes free lodging, but it was modified by a
practice of "boarding out" the aged. It was of considerably less
importance than it is to-day because the amount of endowed charities
bore a much greater proportion to the number of old who were to be
relieved.

[Sidenote: β. Children.]

[Sidenote: 3 _a_. Apprenticeship to masters.]

We will now consider the main methods of providing for the young.
Compulsory education does not seem to be peculiar to the nineteenth
century. In the reign of Charles I. all children had to be taught to
work and trained to a trade. The method chiefly employed was that of
apprenticeship. But schools, training homes and orphanages also existed
in which children received the technical education of the time. Parents
were obliged to apprentice their children or put them into service
as soon as they were old enough. If the parents were able they paid
the preliminary fee themselves; if not, the parish found masters for
the children, but in this case they often had to work at the more
unskilled trades. Sometimes money was paid for the pauper apprentice
as for any other child, but at other times men were forced to keep
the children without payment. There was often, as we should expect,
a great deal of friction in the matter. In a report from Yorkshire,
signed by Lord Fairfax, we are told that the justices do their best
to find masters and keep the children with them, but that there was
considerable difficulty in so doing[513]. Elsewhere there are also
hints that the masters wished to free themselves from any burden of
the kind[514], but there is much to make us think that on the whole
the method at this time worked well. It was apparently the favourite
remedy for the time for the evils of poverty. The writers of the
legal handbooks insist that it was an especially important part of
the duty of overseers[515], while throughout the seventeenth century
numerous bequests for the purpose were left by private persons[516].
This is very strong evidence that the philanthropists of the time
thought that the binding of poor children apprentice was an excellent
way of providing for their maintenance and training. Laud himself was
especially interested in the matter. In his own lifetime he made a
gift for the purpose of apprenticing ten poor boys of Reading[517],
and either during his lifetime or by his will he also provided funds
for the same object in Croydon, Wokingham, Henley, Wallingford, and
New Windsor[518]. Moreover the Privy Council appear to have specially
enforced this part of the relief of the poor and to have demanded and
received more detailed reports on this subject than on any other. This
action of the Privy Council and the number of these bequests therefore
make us believe that the evils of pauper apprenticeship were not very
prominent in the seventeenth century. No doubt the fact that it was
then the usual custom for an apprentice to board with his master and
not a practice chiefly confined to children brought up by charity, made
a great difference. Both kinds of apprentices were bound in the same
way and would tend to be dealt with in the same manner. The selection
of the master would make the principal difference; and the welfare of
the apprentice would depend upon the care taken by the administrators
of the charities and the parochial funds in providing masters for the
children.

[513] _D. S. P._ Chas. I., Vol. 293, No. 129.

[514] _Ib._ Vol. 190, No. 56.

[515] Dalton's _Country Justice_, 4th edition, 1630, p. 93. See Chapter
VIII.

[516] Among such bequests were:--

Bristol, Edw. Cox, 1622. _Reports of the Char. Com._ VI. pp. 532-533.

"        Andrew Barker, 1658. _Ib._ p. 467.

Oxford, Thomas' Charity, 1639. _Ib._ p. 381.

Exeter, Sir John Acland, 1609. _Reports of Char. Com._ p. 155.

Maidenhead, Rixman's Charity, 1628. _Ib._ XXXII. Pt. 1, p. 77.

At Reading besides Laud's gift there were John Johnson's Charity, 1614,
and Marten's Charity, 1635. _Ib._ p. 43. Both these were in existence
in 1652, but have been lost for many years.

Wokingham, Laud's Gift and Planner's Charity, 1605. _Ib._ p. 213.

Hereford, Wood's Charity, 7 James I. _Ib._ Pt. 2, p. 29.

West Wickham, Lady Slaney, 1607, £3 a year. _Rep._ VI. p. 271.

[517] _Records of the Borough of Reading_, Vol. III. pp. 512, 513. In
1640 £100 was paid for half the year and ten boys were appointed to
be bound apprentices with such masters as the Mayor and aldermen had
arranged, £10 being paid apiece for them.

[518] _Reports of Char. Com._ XXXII. Part 1, 221.

The picture in the _Fortunes of Nigel_ of Jenkin Vincent, the London
apprentice of this time brought up at Christ's Hospital, could not have
been very unlike the reality. Great hardship must have been inflicted
in some cases[519], but when the practice was new and the custom
general, the apprentice bound by charitable funds would not usually be
treated much worse than other apprentices. Otherwise it is not probable
the Privy Councillors in their public capacity, and an Archbishop and
many other charitable people in their private capacities, would have
taken so much trouble to extend this practice by finding the funds for
the purpose of thus providing for the maintenance and education of poor
children.

[519] In the Records of the Borough of Reading between 1630 and 1640
we have an instance of complaint by a pauper apprentice. We are told
that "At this daye complaynt was made by the officers of Shinfeild that
heretofore they gave v li in money and bound John Chaplen, borne in
their parishe, apprentice to William Applebye of Readinge, weaver, for
15 yeares by indenture, of whiche terme 9 yeares are expired, and that
the said apprentice for lacke of meate and drinke and apparell hath
often-tymes run awaye, and is nowe brought agayne by the officers of
Shinfeild desiringe a reformacion or restitucion of the v li.

"William Appleby saith he hath victualls as he himself and family daily
have, and further saith that the said apprentice is soe ill-condicioned
that he will still run awaye and hath noe hope of good service of him.

"All thinges heard, examyned and understood the said William Appleby
was enjoyned to take his apprentice and to sett him to worke agayne and
to use him well in all thinges.

"And the apprentice willed, when he is misused or ill treated to
complayne to Mr Mayour, and he will provide further for him, as shalbe
fitt and expedient in that behaulf." _Records of the Borough of
Reading_, Vol. III., p. 233.

The poor boys of Reading appear to have been regularly placed as
apprentices, sometimes by charitable funds and sometimes by the
overseers.

[Sidenote: 3 _b_. In the bridewells, or Industrial schools of the time.]

But not all destitute children were bound apprentice to masters in the
town. The bridewells or workhouses of the time had often a special
children's department which seems to correspond with our own Industrial
schools.

The London Bridewell had thus two distinct functions to perform. On the
one side it was a House of Correction, on the other it was a technical
school for young people. Sometimes the orphaned sons of freemen were
received there, at other times children were sent by the overseers of
the parishes, and often young vagrants were brought in from the London
streets. They were trained in very various occupations: a full report
of the hospital was drawn up in 1631, and we are then told that "four
silk weavers keep poore children taken from the streets or otherwise
distressed, to the number of forty-five."

There were also more than a hundred others at that time in the
Hospital who were apprenticed to pinmakers, ribbon weavers,
hempdressers, linen weavers, and carpenters[520]. Christ's Hospital
at Ipswich, the Hospital at Reading, and the Nottingham House of
Correction, had all training departments of this kind in which many of
the poor children of these towns were taught trades.

[520] _D. S. P._, Chas. I., Vol. 190. 10. See Appendix XII.

[Sidenote: 4. Schools for little children and orphanages.]

Besides all this, children who were too young to be apprenticed were
in many places taught to spin and sometimes to read and write. We have
seen that in Norwich in every parish "a select woman" was appointed for
this purpose in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, and in 1630 a similar
order was made to the effect "that a knittinge schooledame shalbe
provided in every parishe where there is not one already, to sett
children and other poore on worke[521]." Even in the hamlets like those
of Whitwell and Sellside, in the county of Westmoreland, three poor
boys were maintained at the school by the parish who were to be taught
trades as soon as they were old enough[522]. In Hertfordshire we are
told that many had been placed as apprentices "and such as are not of
fitt yeares to bee put forth wee haue caused to bee sett to spinning
and such smale worke as is most meete for them according to the
tendernesse of their age that idlenesse may not fasten in them[523]."

[521] _Norwich Court Books._ 18th October, 1630.

[522] _D. S. P._, Chas. I., Vol. 388, No. 7, XXXVIII. 2.

[523] _Ib._ Vol. 189. 79.

These schools were not improbably very numerous. In documents
containing the instructions of justices to overseers knitting schools
were advocated. Thus in directions issued in 1622 by some of the
justices of Norfolk for the hundreds of Eynesford and South Erpingham,
the justices resolve "that poore children be put to schoole to
knittinge and spinninge dames and the churchwardens and ouerseers for
the poore to paie the schoole dames their wages where the parents are
not able[524]."

[524] British Museum Add. MSS. No. 12496, f. 222. In another document
containing instructions by justices to overseers the establishment of
knitting schools is advocated. See above, p. 181.

All this points to a system of popular education of the kind then
approved.

In the largest towns orphanages also were established about this
time. Christ's Hospital in London, as we have seen, was originally
established for the little children of the London streets. During this
period there were from seven to nine hundred children maintained at
the cost of this institution, some in London and some at nurse in the
country[525]. At Bristol there were two establishments of the same
kind. Queen Elizabeth's Hospital was founded by a citizen named John
Carr after the model of Christ's Hospital in London. The boys were
subject to the same regulations and still wear the same blue and yellow
dress[526]. The Red Maid's School was endowed by the will of John
Whitson in 1621. It was to consist of a matron and forty girls. The
children were to learn to read and sew and do such other work as the
matron and the Mayor's wife should approve. They were to be apprenticed
for eight years, to wear clothes of red cloth, and attend on the wives
of the Mayor and aldermen on state occasions[527]. In Plymouth, Exeter,
and Norwich also there were similar institutions, but they seem to have
only existed in the large towns. Both in the country and towns orphaned
and deserted children were generally "boarded out" until they were old
enough to be apprenticed, and payments were made for them from the
rates amounting to about a shilling a week.

[525] Reports of the four Royal Hospitals, 1632, 1641. King's
_Pamphlets_, 669 f. 4.

[526] Probate of John Carr's will was granted in 1586. An Act of
Parliament confirming the foundation was passed 39 Eliz. The school
was established on the site of Gaunt's Hospital, and the citizens of
Bristol provided some of the necessary money. _Char. Com. Rep._ VI. p.
463 seq.

[527] _Char. Com. Rep._ VI. p. 490.

Children were thus very well provided for, and their training was
considered a matter of national concern. Parents, whether they were
very poor or not, were compelled to send their children to work or
school and either to apprentice them or to find situations for them. We
are apt to consider popular education an exclusively modern movement,
but in this, as in many other matters, the aims of the seventeenth
century anticipate those of the nineteenth. They had ideas which
were very different from those of to-day as to the kind of training
which was necessary, but they attached an equal importance to the
necessity of training. The Town Council of Norwich and the justices of
Hertfordshire and Norfolk took energetic action in the matter.

[Sidenote: γ. The able-bodied poor.]

[Sidenote: 5. Relief given to prisoners.]

We will now see how the administration of the time affected the
able-bodied poor. The help given to the unemployed is by far the most
important part of this relief, but some aid was also given to prisoners.

The prisoners of the sixteenth century must have suffered great
hardships. No adequate means seem to have existed for their
maintenance. Their friends supported them, and under certain
regulations they were allowed to beg. Several statutes made in the
reign of Elizabeth provided partially for their support as part
of the relief of the poor[528]. By the statute of 1601 prisoners
were to be relieved by a county rate. The County Treasurer, who was
responsible for the relief of soldiers and hospitals, also disbursed
a part of the funds to them, and every county was bound to pay at
least twenty shillings a year to the prisoners of the King's Bench and
Marshalsea[529]. Still the help given was very small; up to 1650 the
allowance granted to the poor in the Norfolk prison was only a penny a
day[530], and this sum could barely have sufficed to keep them alive.
In Devonshire their allowance was increased in 1608 because "divers of
them of late have perished through want"[531]. We must remember that
incarceration in these prisons was the fate of debtors. Charitable
people tried to help these people, and bequests were often made for the
purpose of granting them some assistance. Thus in the reign of Charles
I. George White of Bristol left a gift of five pounds a year to be
used for the purpose of freeing or relieving some of the prisoners in
the Bristol Newgate, and there are many other bequests of the same
kind[532]. Still the amount of these legacies was wholly insufficient
for the need. Certainly neither the legislators nor the administrators
of the reigns of the earlier Stuarts made the criminal poor more
comfortable than the unfortunate poor. If we realise the condition of
the prisoners of this time we can understand why Houses of Correction
were regarded as charitable foundations. We can also see how it was
that whipping and stocking were so frequently inflicted and that they
were comparatively merciful punishments.

[528] 14 Eliz. c. 5; 39 Eliz. c. 3.

[529] 43 Eliz. c. 2.

[530] _Orders of the Norfolk Quarter Sessions_, 1650.

[531] _Quarter Sessions from Queen Elizabeth to Queen Anne_, p. 91. A.
H. A. Hamilton.

[532] _Char. Com. Rep._, VI. p. 529.

Richard Holworthy also in 1640 left £20 for the poor in the Bristol
Newgate.

At Oxford, Wardell in 1625 and Myles Windsor both left the profits of a
small sum for the poor in Bocardo. _Rep._ VI., p. 403, 404.

At Launceston by Connock's charity in 1611 a rent of 52_s._ a year was
set apart for the poor felons in the county gaol. _Rep._ 32. 1, p. 406.

Bequests in London for this purpose were very frequent. _Rep._ VI. p.
302. Sir T. Bennett in 1616 left £24 a year for redeeming twelve or
more poor debtors.

[Sidenote: 6. Provision of funds to provide work for the unemployed.]

But the provision for the unemployed workmen is by far the most
characteristic part of the early seventeenth century administration.
A man who was unemployed and had no resources had either to beg or to
steal. If he begged, he was whipped; if he stole, he went to one of
the terrible prisons of the time. The bands of armed vagrants, who
made themselves terrible by their numbers and defied the law, were
therefore only a natural consequence of the social conditions of the
period. Repressive measures were tried but did not succeed because
force could not restrain a man from begging if that was his only means
of escaping starvation. The provision of work which had been made for
the unemployed before 1597 was quite inadequate, and it remained for
the earlier Stuarts to develope and extend the system.

We will examine first some of the methods of raising funds which now
came to be utilised, and secondly a few of the various plans adopted in
different places at different times with the object of employing the
poor.

It is characteristic of the time that the money was frequently
provided by private people. At Guildford Archbishop Abbot founded a
workhouse, and we are told that the poor men of the town were employed
to spin flax and hemp into cloth, and that this was found to be a
"great comfort to many poore workefolke men, women and children[533]".

[533] _Dom. State Papers_, Chas. I., Vol. 191, 42.

At New Windsor several sums of money were left for this purpose. One
of these was bequeathed by Andrew Windsor in a will dated 1621. He
bequeathed £200, the annual interest from which amounted to fourteen
pounds. With this the poor were to be set to work in the making of
cloth. To some extent the donor's intentions were fulfilled up to the
present century. During the eighteenth century and up to 1829 the money
was expended in setting the poor to work to spin sheeting[534].

[534] _Rep. Char. Com._, XXXII. Pt. 1, p. 100.

Other legacies left at New Windsor for this purpose were as follows:--

Mathias Jenis £20 "towards a stock for the setting of poor people of
Windsor on work or to purchase some parcel of land for their relief."

B. Chert gave a similar sum for the same purposes. _Rep._ XXXII. 1, p.
98.

There were many other gifts of the same kind, but of some no farther
trace has been found, while others are employed for a somewhat
different purpose[535].

[535] Other charities of the same kind were those of

Lawrence Atwill, Exeter, 1588, £600. _Rep._ VI. p. 136.

George White, Bristol, 10 Chas. I., £100. _Rep._ VI. p. 530.

Aldworth, Bristol, 1634, £1000 towards the setting of poor people on
work. _Char. Com. Rep._ VIII. p. 58.

Atwell's gift. A lost charity of Wolverhampton. _Rep._ V. 593.

Croydon. Henry Smith gave £1000 in 1624, subject to certain
trusts, which was partly to be used for this purpose. _Bibliotheca
Topographica_, II. p. 79.

Hereford. Francis Pember, 1632, left money which in 1635 was assigned
by his executors to be used for setting poor children to work.
_Report_, XXII. ii. p. 39.

Besides these voluntary contributions the finding of work for the
unemployed was still in some cases regarded mainly as a municipal
duty. Thus at Richmond in Yorkshire before 1631 the money for this
purpose had been provided from the town chest, and about the same time
a contribution was requested but not obtained from the Corporation of
Wells[536].

[536] _Dom. S. P._, Chas. I., Vol. 189, 65, and Vol. 194, 19.

Usually however the funds were provided by means of parochial
rates. A lump sum was raised called the "stock." This was expended
in purchasing materials and implements, and ought to have been
continuously replaced when the finished products were sold. A "stock"
was thus obtained in the three parishes of Beverley; each parish
contributed six or seven pounds, besides the amount they formerly had,
and the poor were employed in spinning hemp[537].

[537] _Dom. S. P._, Chas. I., Vol. 189, 8. X. A detailed assessment for
the raising of a stock and relief of the poor was made in Norwich in
1644. See Appendix.

It was usually in these three ways that the money was raised for the
purpose of finding work for the unemployed, but many different methods
were used in the administration.

[Sidenote: 7 _a_. Stocks used to employ the poor in their houses or
elsewhere.]

We will now examine some of the more typical cases of setting the poor
to work. Generally we hear that stocks were raised and the poor found
with work, but we do not hear that the work was done in any public
building. It does not follow that a building was not used, but we do
not hear that one was provided. We will first notice a few instances in
which the poor were set to work in this way, and we will then examine
some of the Jersey schools and the workhouses and Houses of Correction
of the period. Lastly, we will endeavour to see what expedients were
adopted by public or semi-public authorities to provide the poor with
work without directly employing them. Under this head we will notice
such expedients as emigration, putting pressure on employers, and the
various ways in which a young artisan or tradesman was helped to set up
in business for himself.

We shall see later that all these expedients were adopted much more
often after 1631 than before it, and it is at that date that our
information is most complete. About that time we hear of several
ways in which the poor were employed directly or indirectly by the
public authorities, but in which we are not told of the erection
of a workhouse or other building of the kind. In Winchester, for
instance, the stock was placed in a clothier's hands; at Maidstone
"the towne doth ymploy poore women and their children in spinning,
making of buttons and twisting of threed for the same." In two of the
hundreds[538] of Shropshire "the poore of euery paryshe w^{th}in the
said hundreds are sufficiently provided for and are not permitted to
wander or beg but are set to worke on husbandry as the state of the
countrey doth require."

[538] _Ib._ Chas. I., Vol. 188, 101; Vol. 186, 74; Vol. 194, 17. IV.

All these and many other instances are reported in 1631, but there
are examples at other times. At Norwich many plans were tried[539],
but in 1625 it was resolved that the stone-mines should be used for
that purpose. The workmen were to be "sett on worke" the next Monday
at eight o'clock and surveyors were ordered to be present. "And the
Belman ys required to warne all such as want worke and dwell not in
infected howses to repaire thither at that hower w^{th} barrowes and
fittinge tooles to digg stone & they shall be compounded w^{th}all for
reasonable wages[540]."

[539] In Dec. 1630 a certain "Nathaniell Crotch was appointed to sett
the poore on worke in the Newhall," and certain aldermen were appointed
to overlook the work done. _Court Books, Norwich_, 23 Dec. 1630.

[540] _Court Books, Norwich_, 3rd Nov. 1625, f. 72. Other plans were
even then contemplated at Norwich, and on Nov. 16th people were
appointed in every ward to "sett the poore on worke."

At King's Lynn also different expedients were adopted. As early as 1581
money had been spent in changing St James's Church into a workhouse,
and shortly afterwards we have evidence of employment being then given
to the poor. In 1623 the building was pulled down, and possibly in
consequence of this we find an agreement made in that year between
the citizens on the one side and a merchant taylor, a glover and a
woolchapman on the other. These last undertook not only to teach
children to spin worsted yarn, but also to give employment to the poor,
and to pay proper wages to those who were not learners. In June, 1631,
the Mayor and the Recorder sent in a report to the Sheriff, in which
they said that then they had "bought materialls to sett the able-bodyed
poore on worke not suffering to o^r knowledge anie poore to stragle and
begg upp and downe the streets of this Burgh[541]." In Lynn, therefore,
the authorities on several occasions made energetic efforts to find
employment for those out of work, and very possibly some arrangement
of this sort was in continuous operation from the year 1581.

[541] _Hist. Mun. Com. Report_, XI. App. III. p. 247; _D. S. P._, Chas.
I., Vol. 195, 46.

[Sidenote: 7 _b_. Introduction of new trades.]

Sometimes the authorities utilised the labour of their poor in order
to establish a new trade. Thus in eight of the towns of Hertfordshire
public funds were obtained for an unsuccessful attempt to employ
those out of work in making serges and baize, then called the "new
drapery[542]." A project of the same kind was suggested to the justices
of Pembrokeshire, but they were very cautious about committing
themselves to its adoption[543].

[542] _Cal. of State Papers_, May 10th, 1620.

[543] _D. S. P._, Chas. I., Vol. 192, 70 and 71.

Our informants generally tell us only that stocks were raised and the
poor set to work. But from the instances we have just examined we can
see that many kinds of employment were used. On the whole clothmaking
and the provision of flax, hemp and tow were the most usual expedients.

[Sidenote: 7 _c_. Workhouses and Jersey schools.]

But both private employers and public officials found that if
the very poor took work into their homes they might embezzle the
materials. Moreover, the seventeenth century administrators often
carefully provided for the training of workers, and this could be more
conveniently done in some building. We, therefore, hear of the erection
of workhouses and Jersey schools and the continued use of Houses of
Correction. At Newbury and Reading institutions of this kind were
founded by Mr Kendrick. At Newbury we are told threescore persons were
employed in the trade of clothing and other manufactures, most of these
"being houskeepers and havinge wyfes and children depending upon their
labours." Besides this fifty households were set to work by spinning
for the workhouse, and a "stock" was raised by taxation to be partly
expended "to imploie the poore in worke[544]."

[544] _Ib._ Vol. 192, 14 II.

We have detailed accounts of the Sheffield corporation. From these we
find that they spent about two hundred pounds in building a workhouse
and providing the necessary materials. The details of the construction
were very carefully planned; the carpenters were sent to Newark to see
the workhouse there and every item of expenditure is set down in the
accounts[545].

[545] _Extracts from the Earliest Book of Accounts of Sheffield._
Entries from 1628 onwards. By J. D. Leader.

At Taunton and Abingdon similar institutions seem to have been
established in consequence of the special activity of the years after
1630. The Taunton workhouse was newly built in May 1631, and some
children and others who were able to work were already sent there to
be trained in labour[546]. In June also in 1631 the Mayor of Abingdon
reports that "wee haue erected w^{th}in our borough a workehouse to
sett poore people to worke[547]."

[546] _D. S. P._, Chas. I., Vol. 192, 65.

[547] _Ib._ 195, 7.

At Cambridge the workhouse was also a House of Correction. In 1628
many houses had already been built for the benefit and employment of
the poorer sort of people, and in that year Hobson gave the town the
site without Barnwell Gate on condition that a more convenient place
should be erected. This was soon afterwards begun, and was partially
paid for by certain sums, which had been sent to the town for the
plague-stricken poor in 1631, and which after that time remained in the
hands of the Corporation. In 1675 Hobson's workhouse was still not only
a House of Correction but a place where five combers could be employed
if they wanted work, and where all the poor people of the town that
desired to have work in spinning and weaving were to be provided with
employment and to be paid the usual wages[548].

[548] Cooper's _Annals of Cambridge_, Vol. III., pp. 204 seqq. and 569,
570.

In these cases the workhouses are all in large towns, but in one
country district there were small institutions of the kind in the
parishes. The justices responsible for Little Holland in Lincolnshire
report in 1635 that in "all our seuerall parishes wee haue a Towne
stocke with a workhouse, a master and utensills and that there hath
beene aboue two hundred poore people sett on worke and imployed weekly
by the officers[549]."

[549] _D. S. P._, Chas. I., Vol. 315, No. 99.

Workhouses were thus fairly numerous and varied greatly in size. They
were not then like a modern workhouse, but were places where people
who could work were sent that they might be trained and employed.
They were, too, municipal or parochial institutions, whereas Houses
of Correction were not parochial, but were either municipal or county
undertakings.

[Sidenote: 7 _d_. Bridewells.]

In the sixteenth century we have seen that the distinction between
the two was not very great, but in this period the new Houses of
Correction are much more like gaols. This is especially the case with
those erected by public funds, those which were privately endowed
still retained much of their old character. London, Bristol, Norwich,
Gloucester and many other places had organised their Bridewells either
before or during the reign of Queen Elizabeth, and we have already
noticed that there were four Houses of Correction in Devonshire in
1598[550]. If was during the early part of the seventeenth century
however that Houses of Correction appear to have been established
in every county. They formed a necessary part of the system of the
time. You could not provide work and maintenance for everybody unless
you had some arrangement for coercing idlers. A great many of these
institutions appear to have been established or revived after 1597. In
1598 one was founded at Liverpool, and in 1601 some measures of the
same kind were taken in Nottingham and in Kendal, Westmoreland[551].

[550] The Barnstaple workhouse was in existence soon afterwards. 1607.
"Paid for erecting and placing the stoope in the house of Correction,
18_d._" 1633-1640, "Paid to John Locke who is appointed to the charge
of the Workhouse for two journeys here, 10_s._ 10_d._" _North Devon
Herald_, Aug. 19th, 1880, and Aug. 12th, 1880.

[551] _Selections from the Municipal Archives of Liverpool_, Picton,
June 24th, 1598. "It was agreed by all the assembly that a house termed
a 'House of Correction' shoulde be had and taken for the poore people
aforesaid," and it was further arranged that Mr More should let his
house at Poole for that purpose at a reasonable rent.

For Nottingham, see _Nottingham Records_, Vol. IV., p. 225. In 1601 it
was arranged that John Cooper should remain keeper of St John. He was
to take up rogues and punish those committed to him, though at the same
time he was to have an allowance for the poor infants and others which
were sent to him.

Kendal, A.D. 1601. There is a list of collectors of benevolences for
the House of Correction. _Hist. Man. Com. Rep._ X. App. IV., p. 299.

Others were erected shortly after the statute of 1610 was passed:
thus in 1614 the City of London consented to help the counties of
Middlesex and Surrey to build Houses of Correction: about the same time
the Nottingham burgesses furnished and reorganised St John's Hospital
for this purpose, and both Preston and Manchester had followed the
same example before 1620[552]. In the reports of 1630 to 1639 the
existence of Houses of Correction is assumed, since the justices state
how many idlers have been sent to them[553]. Sometimes the reports
give a few details concerning them; at Hastings the justices tell us
they have kept their House of Correction in good repair[554], and from
the justices of Edwinstree and Odsey in 1631 we learn that a House
of Correction had been long maintained at Buntingford, and that the
justices send their prisoners there although there is a more important
institution of the kind in the county, fourteen miles distant[555].
The justices' reports thus indicate that Houses of Correction were
established in most places before 1635. This impression is confirmed by
a letter from the Earl of Pembroke to the justices of South Wiltshire.
He complains that there is no place of the kind nearer than Devizes,
and he asks the Council to enforce his request that another should be
built in Wiltshire[556]. This letter would hardly have been written
unless in 1623 it was usual for Houses of Correction to be nearer than
Devizes is to South Wiltshire, and seems therefore to show that they
were now a general institution.

[552] May 19, 1615. "The company decide to raise 40 marks for
furnishing St John's and for setting the poor there to work."
_Nottingham Records_, Vol. IV., p. 331.

June 21, 1615. An agreement was made with John Kirby. He agrees
to "diligently teach, instructe and bringe upp all such youthes,
children and other persons as shalbe sent or committed into the saied
Howse of Correccon in some honest and true labour soe longe as they
shall remayne there vnder his chardge and government and shall fynde
and allowe vnto them convenient meate, drynke, apparell and other
necessaries vnlesse they bee lame and impotent and nott able to worke."
For Manchester and Preston see Earwaker, _Constables' Accounts_, Vol.
I., pp. 39, 54 and 65.

[553] _D. S. P._, Chas. I. Vol. 349, 72, Hayridge etc. Devon. _Ib._
Vol. 349, 12, Hartesmere, Suffolk. _Ib._ 192, 79, Blofield, Norfolk.
_Ib._ Vol. 250, 42, Arundel, Hants. _Ib._ Vol. 426, 67, Bastable and
Becontree, Essex, &c. The justices of Somerset write "It was presented
to us that many persons lived out of service w^{th}in certayne parishes
whome wee sent to the Howse of Correccon at Shepton Mallet," _Ib._
Vol. 194, 20. At Chichester it is reported that "there is a house of
Correccon neere the common prison in the said Cittie w^{ch} is parcell
of the said provision and that such prisoners as are thether committed
are employed to worke duringe the tyme of their restraynt. _Ib._ Vol.
190, 67.

[554] _Ib._ Vol. 188, 34.

[555] _Ib._ Vol. 189, 13. Eight years later this house at Buntingford
was still in existence and reported to be doing much good in the
country. _Ib._ Vol. 426, 73. July, 1639.

[556] _Cal. of State Papers_, May 15, 1623.

Their character seems to have been much the same as in the preceding
century. They provided a temporary lodging for stranger vagrants and
a house of detention in which the idlers and offenders convicted for
small causes could be made to work hard and were possibly reformed.
Coarse kinds of labour were used at the London Bridewell, mainly the
beating of hemp, but sometimes other plans were tried and the prisoners
were put under the care of undertakers who agreed to keep them all at
work and made such profit as they were able[557].

[557] _Remembrancia_, II. 254.

But there were many other ways in which the unemployed were provided
for. The modern remedy of emigration was adopted, pressure was put upon
employers and there were various ways in which money could be lent to
set a young householder up in business.

[Sidenote: 7 _e_. Emigration.]

It was about this time, and partly in connection with Bridewell,
that the remedy offered by emigration was adopted. It was the age in
which several of our colonies were founded and first developed. The
earliest vagrant emigrants were sent to Virginia. We hear of a payment
of 12_s._ 3_d._ from a London parish "towards the transportacon of a
hundred children to Virginia by the Lord Maior's appointment," in 1617
and in 1619[558]. Again, in 1622 and 1635, vagrants were detained in
Bridewell for Virginia, who were usually paid for by municipal funds
and collections, though in a few cases we are told that the parochial
officials sent particular people and paid their expenses. A few years
later some vagabonds were sent to sea, and others were put to work in
the Barbadoes[559]. The emigrants did not come only from London; three
boys of Barnstaple departed in 1633-4, and probably there were many
more both from Barnstaple and other places. The emigrants thus sent
out were bound apprentice for some years to some employer, and at the
end of their term of years they were to have the opportunity of making
plantations for themselves. There is a declaration made in 1647, by
the Earl of Carlisle, who was Lord of the Caribee Islands, in which it
is stated that there was not land enough in Barbados for all who had
served their time[560], and that every freeman unprovided with land may
have a grant in his other island of Antigua.

[558] W. A. Bewes, _Church Briefs_, p. 96, 1617, quoting the Records of
St Alphage, London Wall.

[559] Court Books of Bridewell, Feb. 24th, 1619. Sixteen vagrants are
entered as "sent to Virginia," and entries of the same kind follow at
the next meetings.

1622. Vagrants are again "kept for Virginia."

April 1635. It is ordered "that if Mr George Whitmore and the Treasurer
shall think fit to send any vagrants beyond seas, what reasonable
they shall consent unto shall be allowed." At the same meeting some
parishioners agreed to pay for a certain inhabitant of their parish to
go beyond seas.

At the meetings held later in the month on April 15th and 29th several
people are destined for Virginia and others for the Barbadoes.

Other entries occur in 1639.

The names of all these vagrants are given, and the descendants of
several of them occupy good positions in America. An enterprising
American has endeavoured to enlighten his countrymen on the subject,
but the publication of names is now forbidden as the descendants did
not care to be enlightened.

[560] A declaration of the Lord of the Caribee Islands touching
servants who had served their time and could not get land. _King's
Pamphlets_, British Museum, 669 f. 11, f. 106.

In the midst of all the abuse heaped upon the vagrant in his own
time and in our own, it is interesting to remember that he sometimes
did something useful when he got the chance. Even in the days of the
Stuarts he and his descendants played a part in developing the British
Empire and in founding the settlements which led to the existence of
the United States.

[Sidenote: 7 _f_. Pressures on employers.]

But work was also provided for the unemployed by means of pressure
exercised on employers. We have already seen how both in the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries the Privy Council endeavoured to compel
cloth manufacturers to continue to carry on their trade, and how cloth
merchants were called before the justices and judges and ordered not
to dismiss their men[561]. Another instance of the same kind of
interference occurred soon after the outbreak of the Civil War. After
Bristol was captured by the Royalists, Prince Rupert endeavoured to
relieve the distress of the time by ordering the clothiers to keep
their workpeople employed for one month at least[562].

[561] See above, pp. 85, 147 seq., p. 153.

[562] Seyer's _Memoirs of Bristol_, Vol. II., p. 420. 1643.

In another case we can see the justices exercising pressure on
particular individuals not because of a fluctuation of trade, but in
order to carry out the ordinary provisions of the poor law. Hitchen
was the centre of an agricultural district, there was no manufacture
in which men could be employed: wages were very low and many were out
of work. The justices therefore ordered the "richer sort" to give
employment, but they thereby only occasioned complaints, for in this
part of the country there seems to have been a permanent difficulty in
finding work for the poor[563].

[563] _Dom. State Papers_, Chas. I., Vol. 385, No. 43.

At other times municipal rulers exerted their influence in favour of
the inhabitants of a particular town. Thus in 1623 at Reading certain
poor complained; the clothiers were warned to appear and thirty of
them came to the Guildhall. It was arranged that two clothiers should
be appointed to consult with the overseers and see that the poor were
set to work. However the complaints still continued, and both at this
time and in 1630 the difficulty was met by ordering the clothiers
to have all their work done in the town and not to send it into the
country. The distress at Reading was thus lessened at the expense of
the surrounding district[564].

[564] _Records of Reading_, Vol. II., p. 153, Vol. III., p. 39.

That the public authorities of state and town thought they had a right
to exercise pressure of this kind is evident, and many incidental
sayings show us that the employers considered they had a duty in
the matter. Thus at Norwich the hosiers, finding that they cannot
sell their stocks, tell the town rulers that though they have not
yet dismissed their men their money is exhausted and they find it is
impossible for them to go on much longer[565]. They thus intimate that
it was their interest to have dismissed their men sooner but that
they held on as long as they could. In another case an employer writes
to Nicholas about some payment, and hopes he will be used well by the
Council because during a bad time, when most men stopped work, he
continued his manufacture and kept nearly one thousand people at work,
although he lost heavily by so doing[566].

[565] Norwich Court Books, 22nd Feb. 1630/1, f. 326, Vol. 16.

[566] _Dom. S. Papers_, Chas. I., Vol. 184, 65.

All this shows that the employers recognised some sort of
responsibility for the men whom they usually employed. The continuance
of business would save much hardship if the cause of distress was
merely a temporary fluctuation in trade. In the cloth-manufacture this
was often the case, and therefore the pressure brought to bear on
employers in this direction must be considered a real method of helping
the poor.

But there was another way in which pressure was put on employers.
We occasionally find that the town, instead of providing a stock of
materials to set the poor to work, reported that the inhabitants found
employment for them or that the inhabitants provided hemp and tow and
flax and set the poor to work themselves[567]. This not improbably
points to some plan like that of the roundsman system of later days. A
man in want of work, on applying to the parish authorities, was sent
round to different employers and was set to work by each of them for a
short period. This plan does not seem to have been much used, for in
most cases the justices mention that the overseers had raised stocks of
money in order to provide work for the ablebodied, and thus imply their
intention of giving direct employment.

[567] Eastwicke. "The poore are set on worke by the inhabitants."

Hundred of Braughing, 4th April, 1631. "Noe stoeke to sett the poore on
worke but they are sett on worke by the inhabitants to spinn towe at
iiii_d._ the pound." _Dom. S. P._, Charles I., Vol. 189, No. 80. See
Appendix.

[Sidenote: 7 _g_. Advancement of capital without interest.]

Perhaps the charity which was most peculiar to the seventeenth century
was that of lending sums of money to set young tradesmen and artificers
up in business for themselves.

During the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries capital was growing
a more and more important factor in production and it was becoming
an increasingly difficult thing for the young journeyman to become a
master.

We must remember that six to twelve per cent. was the ordinary rate
of interest at the time. The difficulty of paying so much probably
prevented many poor young men from starting business. Moreover all
through the Middle Ages lending money for interest was considered
contrary to Christian morality, and many men still held to the old
opinion. In great numbers of places therefore funds were bequeathed
to what have been termed "Lending Cash Charities." Sums were lent to
young men, or sometimes to older men who had lost their capital, either
for no return or at what was then a low rate of interest, and the
borrowers had to find security for the repayment of the original sum.
Many of the City Companies are responsible for the administration of
very considerable sums of this kind. The Haberdashers' Company alone
possesses £2510 which ought to be lent gratis and which was bequeathed
by many different donors between the years 1569 and 1638. The Mercers'
Company possesses at least twenty-one gifts of this kind. One of the
most considerable of these is that of Lady Campbell, who in 1642
bequeathed £1000 which was to be lent gratis on good security to eight
young men of the Mercers' Company; shopkeepers of the mercery were to
be preferred, and next to them silkmen[568].

[568] _Haberdashers' Company Char. Com. Rep._ X. p. 230. _Mercers'
Company Char. Com. Rep._ VI., pp. 285, 291, 307.

Specimens.

David Appowell, 1508. £100 to be lent to two young men for seven years
in consideration of four cart-loads of coal every year.

Alice Blundell, 1570. £100 to be lent to two young men who were to
give 1_s._ 1_d._ every week to thirteen poor folk of the parish of St
Lawrence Jewry.

Richard Fishborne, 1625. £1000 to be lent to five young men free of the
Company £200 each for five years gratis with three good securities.

Not only the City Companies but also the town rulers of most provincial
towns and sometimes parish authorities were trustees for such
charities. At Ipswich bequests of this kind are especially numerous;
they are much smaller in amount than those of London, but they are
typical of the kind of charity that once existed in almost every town
in which old records remain. In common with twenty-three other towns,
Ipswich had an interest in Sir Thomas White's will and received in
its turn £100 to be lent to four poor tradesmen. Besides this no less
than eleven other legacies of this sort were received before 1635.
Amongst these Mrs Alice Scrivener gave £100 to be lent gratis to ten
people for four years, Christopher Cock gave £100 to be lent to four
clothiers for five years, and John Barrett £20 to four shoemakers
without interest[569]. At Reading the same kind of thing was done; in
1626 Mr Ironside left £100 to be lent gratis to two clothiers and two
shopkeepers, and in 1633 Richard Johnson gave £100 for four tradesmen
for twelve years[570]. At Oxford there were once many sums for such
loans, but these have most of them either been lost or are used for
other purposes[571].

[569] _Legacies to charitable uses in Ipswich_, p. 74 seq.

Other Cash Charities of the same kind for the benefit of the
inhabitants of Ipswich were as follows:--

1579. Mrs Rose Bloise £20 to four handicraftsmen for two or three years.

1583. Mr John Tye £25 to five or more persons who are inhabitants for
not longer than three years without interest.

1595. Mr Thos. Goodwin £40 for four poor occupiers for two years
without interest.

1608. Mrs Alice Bloise £40 to six young men, being freemen for three
years.

1616. Mr Willm. Birden £20 to four poor occupiers for four years.

1616. Mr Willm. Acton £80 to four clothiers for four years.

      Mr J. Acton added £20 to be lent in the same manner.

1621. Mr Rich. Martin left overplus of certain revenues to be lent to
clothiers.

[570] _Char. Com. Report_, 32, Pt. 1, p. 43. Ironside's Charity.

_Reading Records_, Vol. III., p. 170. Richard Johnson.

Other charities of the kind existed in Reading. See Barbor's and
Winche's _Charities Rep._, 32. Pt. 1, p. 43.
[571] _Rep._ VI., p. 397 seq.

Among the lost charities of Oxford are the following:--

Jane Fulsey, 1603. £40 to be lent to four poor tradesmen for three
years.

Robert Wilson, 1640. £20 to be lent in two, three or four equal
portions for seven years. _Ib._ p. 404.

There are sixteen other lost charities of the kind either without date
or of later date than 1640, and three or four other lending charities
which are still wholly or partially in existence.


In Barnstaple, Bristol, Newbury, Lichfield, Wolverhampton and
Colchester[572] there were similar bequests, and apparently in most
towns charitable funds of this kind were in existence during the
reigns of the earlier Stuarts. It was one of the ways in which the
philanthropists of the time endeavoured to give employment, only
in this case it was not to the vagrant, but to the householder or
skilled workman. Usually these sums were given by private people and
administered by the town. But at Hitchin we find something of the kind
suggested as a method of poor relief. The justices in their report
recount the sufferings of the poor during the plague, and say that
"three poore tradesmen who were shutt up And haue lost their custome
and spent their meanes haue petitioned for stock to put them into Trade
againe[573]." The matter was not yet decided, but from the justices'
language it is clear that they regarded it as quite within their
power to grant relief in this manner. John Lock, tailor of London,
bequeathed gifts of £5 to £10 to the apprentices of Bridewell with a
similar object, and, having regard to the circumstances of the time,
few charities would probably have had a better effect if they had been
honestly administered.

[572] See _Reports of the Charity Commissioners_.

Among these sums at Bristol were the following:--

Alderman Thorne's Gift £500 in 1532 to "succour young men that were
minded to cloth making."

John Heydon, 1579. £100 for two young men trading over seas at interest
of £3. 6_s._ 8_d._

Alderman Whitson, 1627. £500, £250 to five young men for seven years at
interest of ten shillings, £250 to twenty tradesmen for seven years,
&c. _Report_ VIII., p. 597 seq.

Such bequests were also sometimes in the hands of parochial officials.

St Mary, Aldermary. John Kemp in 1569 gave £100 to the churchwardens
that they might lend the same to ten poor occupiers without interest.

Anthony Sprott in 1607 gave £20 to the churchwardens and parishioners
to be lent by them to a young occupier at 16_s._ a year. _Rep._ VI., p.
201.

[573] _Dom. State Papers_, Chas. I., Vol. 349, No. 70.

We thus see that many different methods were employed to relieve the
old, to train the young and to give work to the able-bodied. The
examples we have already given afford some evidence that legal poor
relief had become well established in many districts, but it was not
equally well administered at all times and in all places. We will now
inquire when and how the administration of the law was improved, and
the answer to this question may suggest the reason why the history
of the English Poor Law is different to that of the rest of Western
Europe.




CHAPTER XII.

1597-1644.

THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE POOR LAW AS A WHOLE.

  1. Importance of the period 1597 to 1644.
    (_a_) Because it was the period when the relief of the impotent poor
became established.
    (_b_) Because it is the only period in which many efforts were made to
set the unemployed to work.

 Administration of the Poor Law as a whole.

  2. Negligent administration of the Poor Law in the North and extreme
West.
  3. The administration of the Poor Law in the rest of England varied
with the action of the Privy Council.
  4. Action of the Privy Council and administration between 1597 and
1605.
  5. Action of the Privy Council and administration between 1605 and
1629.
  6. Action of the Privy Council and administration between 1629 and
1644.
    (_a_) State of affairs in 1631.
    (_b_) Improvement effected in 1631 and 1632.
    (_c_) Improvement maintained between 1631 and 1640.

 Provision of Work for the Unemployed.

  7. The improvement effected in 1631 especially concerned the
unemployed.
  8. The detailed report from Bassetlaw.
  9. Provision of work: (_a_) in the North and extreme West, (_b_)
in the towns, (_c_) in the Western counties, (_d_) in the Eastern
counties.
  10. Summary.


[Sidenote: 1. Importance of the period 1597-1644.]

We have already examined both the machinery which existed for the
execution of the poor law and the different methods which were used for
relieving the impotent, for training the young and for [Sidenote: 1.
(_a_) Because it was the period when the relief of the impotent poor
became established.]

providing work for the unemployed. We have now to consider the
administration as a whole; to find out when and where the machinery
was put in motion and how far these methods were generally employed.
The history of poor relief in the sixteenth century has already shown
us that it was far more easy to pass a Poor Law than to procure a good
system of administration. There were many poor laws before those of
1597 and 1601 but they were not well administered: they were never so
generally or so effectively enforced as to become part of the practice
as well as of the law of the country.

If the last Elizabethan poor law had been no more successful than these
earlier statutes the whole system of compulsory poor relief would
probably have collapsed during the Civil War. The fact that the part
of the poor law relating to children and the destitute survived that
war, and has ever since formed part of our social organisation may be
attributed therefore to the improved administration of the earlier
Stuarts. The administrators of this period are thus responsible for the
continued practice of any legal system of relief at all.

[Sidenote: 1. (_b_) The period 1597 to 1644 is also the only period in
which many efforts were made to set the unemployed to work.]

But the history of administration during this period is important for a
second reason. The part of the poor law relating to the impotent poor
and children has been enforced ever since the reign of Charles I., but
the clauses relating to the unemployed were very little executed after
the Civil War. In 1662 the destitute were relieved, but the unemployed
were no longer set to work. In this respect therefore the poor law
administration of the reigns of the earlier Stuarts is unique. It is
interesting therefore to examine the methods then employed a little
more closely and see if the instances of the provision of work which
we have already considered are isolated cases of this kind of relief
or if they are examples of a general system. If the unemployed were
at all generally set to work, then this period is important, not only
because the legal relief of the destitute then became the practice of
the country, but because we then had more poor relief than we have ever
had before or since. For a short time a limited kind of socialism was
to some extent established.

We will therefore now try to find out how the events of the period
throw light on these two points; (1) when and how was the system of
poor relief thoroughly established, and (2) how far was that part of it
which concerned the employment of the poor ever an important part of
the social organisation of the country.

The two parts of our inquiry are much intermingled, and it is
impossible to separate them entirely. But in the first part we will
consider the system of poor relief as a whole including the finding of
work for the unemployed when it is closely associated with the other
portions of the system, and we will afterwards examine more in detail a
few points which especially concern the provision of work.

[Sidenote: 2. The administration of the law in the North and extreme
West was negligent.]

With regard to the relief of the poor as a whole, it seems clear that
the law was not equally well administered at all places or in all
times. The places in which the administration of the law was least
satisfactory were those farthest from the seat of government. They
are indicated in some cases by the absence of justices' reports; in
others by the character of the reports, or by the distinct statement
of the statute of 1662. From Northumberland and Cumberland and some of
the counties of Wales we have no justices' reports on the poor law,
and we have little evidence from other sources as to any effective
enforcement of the law. From Westmoreland and Lancashire we have very
few reports until 1637 and 1638, and these seem to indicate that the
system of poor relief was then only recently introduced[574]. From
Wiltshire, Devonshire and Cornwall we have a few reports, but they
indicate a comparatively careless administration. There are few or no
cases of setting the poor to work, and in Wiltshire it was difficult
to find masters for the apprentices. But except in Northumberland and
Cumberland some kind of legal poor relief was administered in all
these counties, although it seems to have been less well administered
than in other parts of the country. The statute of 1662 tells us that
at the time of its enactment parts of Wales, the counties forming
the Bishopric of Durham and the county of Yorkshire derived little
benefit from the statute of Elizabeth[575], and except Yorkshire, these
counties are precisely those from which we have few or no reports.

[574] See _supra_, p. 214.

[575] 14 Chas. II., c. 12.

But in the South-east and Midland parts of England and the rest of the
Western shires the case was different. During some part of our period
the system seems to have been on the whole fairly well organised.

[Sidenote: 3. The administration of the Poor Law in the rest of England
depended upon the action of the Privy Council.]

But this was not equally the case at all times. It was the case only
when the justices were vigilant, and they seem to have been made
vigilant mainly by the frequent letters and orders of the Privy Council.

It is this action of the Privy Council that seems to make the
administration of this period different from that of the sixteenth
century, though it was the existence of the justices that caused this
action to be so effectual. But the letters and orders of the Privy
Council were not always equally frequent even during the period from
1597 to 1644.

We have already seen that in 1597 a letter ordering the good execution
of the new poor law was sent to all the justices of England and Wales.
We have also seen that between 1597 and 1629 this kind of action was
exceptional. The Council interfered in particular cases, and in times
of scarcity commanded general measures of relief, but before 1629 it
did not steadily enforce the administration of general measures with
regard to the relief of the poor in ordinary times. But from 1629 to
1640 we find that the matter is altogether different; a commission is
appointed, a new organisation is introduced by the Book of Orders of
1630/1, and for nine years the pressure of the Council on the justices
is constant and continuous. We have now to see if the improvement in
the general administration of the poor law in all parts of the country
corresponded to the periods when the Privy Council was vigorous. We
will consider first the period between 1597 and 1605, secondly that
from 1605 to 1629, and lastly the years from 1629 to 1640. We shall
find that there are grounds for believing that the administration of
the system of poor relief was best when most pressure was exercised and
was lax when pressure was withdrawn. The main improvement therefore in
the organisation of the system took place between 1629 and 1640, that
is under the personal government of Charles I.

[Sidenote: 4. Action of Privy Council and administration between 1597
and 1605.]

The directions of the Privy Council in 1597 seem to have had an
immediate effect both as regards measures of relief and measures of
repression.

As regards the repressive measures and the efficacy of Houses
of Correction the opinion of Lord Coke is decisive. He had many
opportunities of knowledge and had no reason for not being impartial.
Speaking of the employment and correction of vagrants he says, "And
this excellent work is without question feasible. For, upon the making
of the statute of 39 Eliz. and a good space after whilest Justices of
the Peace and other officers were diligent and industrious there was
not a rogue to be seen in any part of England, but when Justices and
other Officers became tepidi or trepidi Rogues etc. swarmed again."
Speaking of gaols and Houses of Correction he tells us, "Few or none
are committed to the common gaol amongst so many malefactors but they
come out worse then they went in. And few are committed to the House
of Correction or Working-House, but they come out better[576]." For a
little time therefore vagrants were repressed, and the discipline and
relief afforded in Houses of Correction were very efficacious.

[576] Coke's _Institutes_ II., p. 729.

There was also an improvement with regard to the administration of
relief to the more deserving classes of the poor. We have already seen
that special energy was displayed in the West Riding of Yorkshire
at this time, and that there the justices found it very difficult
to administer the law, but did execute it to a considerable extent.
In Devonshire also the justices received a letter from the Lord
Lieutenant, urging them to take especial care for the relief of those
in want, and they too began to take measures for carrying out the law.
They revoked the licenses granted for beggars, put in order the Houses
of Correction and authorised a system of organised billeting on the
rich. The poor were to be relieved with two meals a day, one to every
household or two or more according to the ability of the householder.
If there was any default the justices might assess any sum up to
eighteenpence weekly "for every pole[577]." Moreover the justices were
to raise stocks for setting the poor to work. All this points to a
great increase in vigilance after the Order in Council of 1597 and it
also points to the fact that the administration was recent. A general
system of billeting was seldom adopted when the legal relief of the
poor had been long put in practice. Moreover Devonshire and Yorkshire
in later times were backward in administering the law, so that the
improvement was probably at least as great in other counties.

[577] Hamilton's _Quarter Sessions from Queen Eliz. to Queen Anne_, p.
16.

We should also derive a favourable opinion as to the good execution of
the law at that time from the Duke of Stettin's account of his journey
through England in 1602. Speaking of the Royal Exchange he states, "It
is a pleasure to go about there, for one is not molested or accosted
by beggars, who are elsewhere so frequently met with in places of this
kind. For in all England they do not suffer any beggars except they be
few in number and outside the gates.

"Every parish cares for its own poor, strangers are brought to the
hospital, but those that belong to the kingdom or have come from
distant places are sent from one parish to the other, their wants
being cared for until at last they reach their home[578]." The Duke of
Stettin judges favourably most things that he sees in England but still
his account could not have been written unless beggars had been out of
sight in the parts visited by him and unless the poor had seemed to be
relieved in England more effectually than in his own country.

[578] Translation from the "Diary of the Duke of Stettin's Journey,"
pp. 12 and 13, _Trans. of Royal Hist. Soc._

After 1597 therefore the execution of the law appears to have been more
vigorous and the improvement is likely to have been connected with the
action taken by the Privy Council in that year.

[Sidenote: 5. Action of the Privy Council and administration between
1605 and 1629.]

We will now see how the administration of poor relief was carried
out between 1605 and 1629. We know that during these years the Privy
Council did not make continuous efforts on behalf of the deserving
poor. A commission however was contemplated in January 1619/20, and
the special measures in connection with the years of scarcity of 1621
to 1623 were much more organised than in former years, and may have
suggested an improved administration of the law about that time. We
therefore find that on the whole the law appears to have been badly
executed but that from 1621 to 1623 some improvement took place.

We will first see what are the grounds for thinking the law was badly
executed between 1605 and 1629.

Lord Coke himself tells us "rogues soon swarmed again" and his opinion
is confirmed by the evidence of a tract of this time called "Stanleyes
Remedy or the VVay how to reform wandring Beggers, Theeves, high-way
Robbers and Pickpockets."

This pamphlet was not published until 1646 but seems to have been
composed about the year 1606[579]. The writer is a converted highwayman
who is anxious for the reformation of his fellow-sinners. He states
"that Beggerie and Theeverie did never more abound," and he complains
that the branding and whipping parts of the statutes are put in
execution long before any place is provided where the poor could have
work. He thought that this was most unfair to the vagrants for many of
them would work if they could and go voluntarily to workhouses if they
were in existence. He therefore urges the establishment of places where
men could have work in all the larger parishes of the kingdom[580].

[579] The pamphlet is addressed to King James I. and the statute for
branding rogues is called the "new statute": this probably refers to
the 1 Jac. I. c. 7, 1603-4. No mention is made of the 7 Jac. I. c. 4,
which commanded the establishment of Houses of Correction, and was
passed in 1609-10. The pamphlet therefore was written in the reign of
James I., probably soon after 1604 and before 1610.

[580] Stanleyes, _Remedy_, p. 8.

Another pamphlet complaining of the bad execution of the law was
entitled "Greevous Grones for the Poore" and was published in 1622. The
writer of this states that "though the number of the Poore do dailie
increase all things worketh for the worst in their behalfe. For there
hath beene no collection for them, no not these seven yeares in many
parishes of this land especiallie in countrie townes; but many of those
parishes turneth forth their Poore, yea and their lustie labourers that
will not worke or for any misdemeenor want worke, to begge, filtch,
and steale, for their maintenance so that the country is pittifully
pestered with them[581]."

[581] Eden, _State of the Poor_, I. p. 155.

Another document of 1624 gives precisely the same information. This
is a letter from a Mr Williamson to Sir Julius Caesar, the Master
of the Rolls, who was one of the most charitably disposed gentlemen
of the time. The writer thinks the neglect of the overseers to
apprentice children is the true cause of vagrancy. He tells us that
the seventeenth century vagrant like the modern tramp was very seldom
a man who knew a trade[582]. The existence of these untrained men was
due to the fault of the administrators of the Poor Law. For these
"intollerable offences haue originally growen from the Ou(er)seers of
the poore who heretofore and att this day haue and doe so ou(er)see as
though they did not see at all[583]."

[582] "Among fortie beggers you shall not find one man of trade." Add.
MSS., No. 12496, f. 238. A favourite question of the present Lord Chief
Justice of England before he sentences a prisoner is, "Has he ever been
engaged in any regular work or had any definite employment?"

[583] Add. MSS., Brit. Mus., No. 12496, f. 238. This writer differs
from most of the time in expressing disapproval of Bridewells. He is an
advocate for prevention rather than cure, for apprenticing the child
rather than for correcting the vagrant.

These writings would therefore lead us to believe that justices soon
grew careless; the poor were not relieved and in many places there was
very little execution of the law at all. All these statements are made
by writers who are vigorously supporting only one side of the case but
the official evidence of the period confirms their view of the matter.
The reasons given for the appointment of the commission suggested
in 1619/20 show that the unofficial writers had not exaggerated the
existing neglect in the administration of the poor laws. Good laws
have been made but they are not executed because the justices are
negligent and the judges of Assize have not time to fully investigate
the matter. The laws in consequence "are in many partes of our Realme
laid aside or little regarded as lawes not in force or of small
consequence, whereas in some other counties and partes of this kingdome
in w^{ch} by the diligence and industrye of sume justices of the peace
and other magistrates the said lawes haue bine dulye putt in execucon
there hath evidentlye appeared much good and benefitt to haue redowned
to the Comon welth by the same[584]." At this time therefore there was
a real likelihood that the poor law would become obsolete.

[584] Add. MSS., No. 12504, 14th Jan., 17 Jac. I.

However the season of scarcity in 1622-3 was accompanied by a crisis in
the cloth trade and the Privy Council was active in enforcing measures
of relief. A great improvement was consequently then effected in the
execution of temporary measures of corn relief, and some reports
indicate that this was accompanied by a better administration of the
ordinary poor law also.

Thus from Burnham in Buckinghamshire the justices report, "We have
alsoe looked into and have caused the poore to bee well provided for
in every parrish within this diuision both by stocks to sett them on
worke as alsoe by weekely contributions[585]." From several of the
hundreds of Suffolk there are similar reports. Thus in every "towne" of
Lackford and Exning the rates had been augmented and the "poorer sorte
of people within the seurall townes and places are ordered to be sett
on worke[586]." From other districts in both East and West we have like
accounts[587].

[585] _Dom. State Papers_, James I., Vol. 143, 24.

[586] _Ib._, Vol. 142, 14, I.

[587] _Ib._, Vol. 142, 14, II.

"Wee have by our indevours taken order that the aged and ympotent
poore and maymed soldiers be sufficientlie relieved; Those of able and
sturdie bodies are provided of work." Babergh and Cosford, Suffolk;
also in Williton, Freemanors and Carhampton, Somerset: the report is
dated Mar. 20th. _Cal. of State Papers_, under May 8th, 1623.

Between the years 1605 and 1629 therefore the administration of poor
relief was on the whole negligent and in many districts the poor law
was already considered to be of little importance. The government
was however still anxious to secure its enforcement and the measures
taken to relieve distress in 1622-3 effected an improvement in a few
districts.

[Sidenote: 6. Action of the Privy Council and administration between
1629 and 1644.]

But from 1629 to 1644 we have a different state of things. We know
already that during this period the action of the Privy Council was
continuous and constant, and it is in this period therefore that we
shall be able to see how far it was effective. The justices' reports,
to which we have already often referred are the main sources of our
information.

We will endeavour to see how far the evidence of the early part
of the period confirms the view we have already formed as to the
administration of the law at the beginning of the time, and we will
secondly try to estimate the evidence as to improvement during this
period.

[Sidenote: 6. _a._ State of affairs in 1631.]

The condition of affairs before 1631 is indicated by the preamble to
the commission of Jan. 1631/2 and by some of the earlier reports of
1631. The reasons given for the appointment of the commission of 1631/2
are almost exactly the same as those given in the draft of 1619/20.
The justices are said as before to be negligent so that the laws were
almost obsolete in some parts of the country, and this alone shows that
there had been little permanent improvement since 1620. The preamble
also refers to an earlier time "vpon the present making of the said
lawes," when they were duly executed and thus confirms the evidence as
to the good execution of the laws after 1597[588].

[588] Add. MSS., Brit. Mus., 12496, f. 251. "Justices of Peace,
Magistrates, Officers and Ministers are now of late in most parts of
this our Kingdome growne secure in their said negligence, and the
said politique and necessarie Lawes and Statutes laid aside or little
regarded as Lawes of small use and consequence."

The justices' reports of 1631 give us more detailed information of
the same kind. One of these was sent from three of the hundreds of
Hampshire, Fawley, Bountisborough and Mainsborough. The justices say
that they sent an abstract of the act to the officials concerned and
ordered constables, tithingmen, and overseers to bring presentments to
them. But they "for the most parte" replied, "that they haue noe poore
that wanted worke or releife, that they had noe rogues but suche as
were punished." The justices thought this state of things too good to
be true; they made further enquiries and found that the highways were
out of repair, that no monthly meetings had been held by the overseers
and that there were no stocks for setting the poor to work. They also
heard that some of the poor were "in noe small want" but did not
complain because of ignorance or fear. They hoped to effect improvement
by exacting fines for negligence, by publishing the particulars of
their monthly meetings, and by sending a series of definite questions
to the overseers as to the names of the poor relieved or set to
work and of the children over ten years of age who were not bound
apprentice[589]. In this way they tried to obtain detailed statements
so that there could be no evasion of the law. There is a later report
from Fawley concerning corn and apprentices, and the part of the law
relating to apprentices was certainly then carried out[590].

[589] _Dom. State Papers_, Chas. I., Vol. 188, 85. See Appendix XII.

[590] _Ib._, 250, 11, I. The justices had met several times in
accordance with directions from the judges at the last assizes: they
had bound apprentice twenty poor children.

But there are other districts in which the justices do not tell us of
negligent officials, but rather seem proud of their vigour and yet seem
to imply that it was only recently the law had come into force. This is
particularly the case in Radnorshire and Cheshire. In two divisions of
Radnor the justices say they have appointed overseers, and have given
particular directions as to the provision of stocks and return of the
names of the poor relieved[591]. The reports suggest that the justices
were now energetic, but that little had been done before; the mention
of the appointment of overseers is unaccompanied by the word new or by
any statement as to the rendering of the accounts of the old overseers,
so that it is possible that these were the first overseers appointed in
that district.

[591] _Dom. State Papers_, Chas. I., Vol. 194, 18, II. and III.

In two of the divisions of Cheshire the same state of things is
implied more definitely. The justices say that they have ordered the
collection of a stock for the setting the poor to work and for the
relief of the impotent, but they find the people poor and averse to
paying money for any purpose of the kind. They fear some time will
elapse before these orders can be properly executed. At present these
divisions have not got a House of Correction, and the justices wish
to have one in the Castle in order that they may be able to subdue
the people to subjection[592]. These reports seem to reveal a very
primitive state of things, and recall the difficulties in the West
Riding of Yorkshire in 1597, when poor relief seems to have been first
enforced there, and the people greatly objected to the imposition of
rates.

[592] _Dom. State Papers_, Vol. 195, 21 and 31. June, 1631.

Other reports show that the Book of Orders strengthened the hands of
reformers; thus in the town of Wells, charities had been negligently
administered, but after the issue of the orders the Recorder was able
to procure information formerly withheld, and hoped to effect farther
improvement by obtaining a commission of charitable uses[593].

[593] _Ib._, Vol. 194, 19. Wells, Somerset.

It is thus fairly clear that before 1631 the law had not been well
administered. We will now examine the evidence as to the improvement
between 1631 and 1640.

[Sidenote: 6. _b._ Improvement effected in 1631 and 1632.]

The greater number of the reports of 1631 and 1632 point to some
execution of the law before 1631 and suggest improvement rather than
entire innovation. The justices generally state they have "raised
rates" or have bound many more children apprentices or that stocks had
been provided in the parishes where there were none before. Two reports
enable us to trace the process of improvement in detail, and seem to
throw considerable light on the general statements of other documents
of the kind. They do not however present so favourable a view as to
the execution of the law as most of the other returns. These reports
relate to the district of Braughing in Hertfordshire. The overseers
of thirteen places in the half hundred of Braughing made returns to
the justices at six successive monthly meetings held in accordance
with the provisions of the Book of Orders, between Feb. 7th and June
27, 1631. Abstracts of these returns were sent in by the justices
in two documents, one of which was forwarded in April and the other
in July 1631[594]. We can thus see exactly when the improvement was
effected. At the first meeting four parishes provided corn at reduced
rates for the poor. The Book of Orders relating to scarcity had been
issued since September, and we should expect some improvement would
already have been made. Six sets of overseers had already placed some
children apprentices, but not very many, and only two of the largest
places had stocks for setting the poor to work. At the last meeting
on June 27th relief was much more extensively administered. Two
other places provided corn at reduced rates: the six parishes which
formerly had placed a few apprentices now bound many more, while five
other townships also provided for the children in this manner. A much
better provision for the employment of the poor was also made. In five
places instead of two there were now stocks for this purpose and most
of the others give reasons for the want of one. In three cases we
are told there is plenty of employment, at Eastwick the inhabitants
set the poor to work, and at Westmill the general statement only is
made that the poor are relieved according to their necessities. Three
places do not provide stocks or give any reason for not doing so. We
can also see that these funds might often have disappeared, for the
ten pounds stock at Hunsdon had "decayed" to only five pounds at the
end of the period. In the district of Braughing therefore the law
was executed in the larger places before 1630 but negligently even
there. Immediately however after the receipt of the Book of Orders the
justices set themselves to work, held the monthly meetings, stimulated
the overseers, and in five months succeeded in effecting a very
considerable improvement.

[594] See Appendix XII.

This was only typical of what was going on all over the country. It is
of course impossible to quote all the reports of the period; it is
only possible to give particular cases, and to state that they are not
isolated instances, but are typical of the documents of that time. Thus
in April, 1631, we hear that meetings had been rapidly held and that
they had been partially successful, but that the justices were still in
the midst of their activity; they had done a good deal to make matters
better and were still doing more. For example in the account sent from
the New Forest the justices write "the rates for the poore where neede
most requireth wee haue caused to be rised for reliefe of the poore
people w^{th}in that part, and haue given strict order to the ouerseers
for providing necessary releife for such as are ympotent and such as
are able to sett them to worke, and haue alreadie placed many poore
children apprentizes and doe proceede in placinge of more[595]."

[595] _Dom. State Papers_, Chas. I., Vol. 188, 45.

In the returns sent later in the year the organisation appears to
be more settled and we hear that not only the rates are raised but
that they have had a good effect. Thus in Monslow in Shropshire the
justices state "and as for the late booke of orders for the reliefe
of the poore and the punishing of rogues and vagabonds wee have had
severalle monthlye meetings in the said hundred and wee have long since
worked such effect thereby as they have not any rogues or vagabonds
appeared amongst vs or walked abroade as wee can heare of since our
first meetings, and the impotent poore are relieved in such sort by
their parishoners as wee have noe complaints and there are stocks in
all parishes more or lesse as the charge of the parishes require to set
the able poore on worke[596]." Not all the reports are as favourable
as this, but on the whole they indicate that improved order followed
the execution of the Book of Orders. It thus is clear that the Orders
of 1631 had a very considerable immediate effect both in bringing the
law into operation in places where it had been almost or altogether
neglected and still more in improving the administration in those
districts in which the system was already to some extent administered
though not yet effectually.

[596] _Ib._, Vol. 194, 17, V.

[Sidenote: 6. _c._ Improvement maintained between 1631 and 1640.]

We have now to see whether this improved administration was maintained.
The reports are certainly less frequent after 1631 but those that
remain shew that the efficiency is preserved and there is much to
indicate a farther improvement.

We will first examine a few documents which seem to indicate that the
area of administration was extending into backward districts, we will
then investigate a few cases in which we have reports both in 1631 and
in 1638 or 1639, and we will lastly consider a special department of
the poor law system, namely the placing of apprentices.

We have already noted the fact that in the earlier years of the period
there were few reports from Westmoreland and Lancashire.

But in 1638 there are a series of documents from Westmoreland[597]
and several reports from Lancashire. In 1638 some of the Lancashire
parishes adopted the system of billeting the poor in need of relief on
the richer inhabitants. This plan does not seem to have long continued
as an exclusive system of relief, and the facts that it was still
employed and that these are the earliest reports from Westmoreland seem
to indicate that a compulsory system of poor relief had only lately
been established in the northern counties. Moreover in 1637 we are told
that at the meeting of the justices in Rochdale in Sept. 1637, the
churchwardens of Middleton confessed that they had never before levied
a tax for the relief of the poor there; they now however proceeded
to levy one, and in March in the following year the tax provided the
necessary relief[598]. All this seems to show that the area of the
administration of the poor law was extending and that in 1638 there was
little danger of the system of poor relief becoming obsolete but that
it was obtaining a firmer hold over the country.

[597] _Dom. State Papers_, Chas. I., Vol. 388, 7. April 18th, 1638.

[598] _Ib._, Vol. 385, 15. The want of a poor rate seems to be reported
as an unusual fact, and at Rochdale at the same time the poor rates
amounted to £340, a hundred and twenty impotent people were relieved,
and a hundred poor families assisted.

We will now examine a few of the cases in which we have reports from
the same district both in 1631 and 1638 or 1639. We have already
noted the detailed returns from Braughing. It happens that one of the
latest documents of the series returned in August 1639 comes from the
hundreds of Hertford and Braughing. The justices tell us that our
"ympotent poore are weekelie releiued by a certein pencon and the
rates increased as necessitie requires. And those of able bodies are
plentifullie stored with work for the maynteynance of their families";
five apprentices had also lately been bound[599]. From this we see that
the improved administration there lasted throughout the period.

[599] _Dom. State Papers_, Chas. I., Vol. 427, 4. Aug. 1st, 1639.

We have several other places from which we have similar reports.
Skenfreth, one of the hundreds of Monmouth, often sent accounts of the
proceedings of the justices. One belongs to May, 1631. The justices
state some of the things they did both before the Commission and
afterwards. Before the Commission they provided weekly stipends for all
the aged and impotent people, "sithence the said commission" they "have
taken order that the same stipends shalbe contineually paied soe that
none of any such poore people have made any complaint unto us for any
mainetenance." Both before and after the commission they had punished
rogues and since they had also placed apprentices and suppressed
alehouses. Moreover the highways had been last year in better condition
than for twenty years before[600].

[600] _Ib._, Vol. 192, 51. May 26, 1631.

Thus the immediate improvement effected by the commission was that
the pensions were paid as well as ordered, apprentices were bound and
alehouses suppressed.

In May, 1637, we have a report from the same district together with the
hundreds of Ragland and Trellech. At that time apprentices were bound,
rogues punished and efforts made to secure the observance of fasting
days. The justices have also "taken course for provision of stock to
sett the poore on worke," and have "caused to be sufficiently relieved
all the aged lame and ympotent people[601]." Thus if these documents
are to be believed the improvement effected in 1631 was maintained and
even increased in this hundred of Skenfreth.

[601] _Ib._, Vol. 355, 63. See also Vol. 293, No. 23.

There are many other cases in which reports are sent in several times
from the same place and all show that the improvement made in 1631 was
continued in 1637, 1638 or 1639[602].

[602] From Whittlesford, Chilford and Radfield, Cambridgeshire, April
1631, Vol. 189, 75, the justices report there are twenty-five "townes,"
and state "That the impotent poore in every towne are releeved. That
wee have put out in these three hundreds betweene six and seaven score
apprentyces. That the able poore are provyded for or sett to worke."

From the same three hundreds. July 1638. "We are certifyed by the
ouerseers for the poore that the impotent poore are relieved and the
other poore are provided of worke." Do. Vol. 395, 114.

From Freebridge Lynn, Freebridge Marshland, and Clackclose, Norfolk,
the justices, in 1631, report that the impotent were relieved, and
children were bound apprentice. Vol. 195, 47.

In July 1638, we hear from the same district, "And more particularly
wee haue taken especiall care that the statute of the 43^{th} yere of
Quene Elizabeth shold be exactlie obserued in raysing of stocks of
materialls for setting the poore of able bodyes to worke and raising
competent somes of monye for the releife of the poore and impotent and
putting forth poore children to be apprentices." Vol. 395, 32.

See also Edwinstree and Odsey, 189, 13, and 426, 73, etc.

We will now examine a few of the reports which relate especially to
the placing of apprentices. Before May 1635 the Privy Council or
the commissioners seem to have urged the justices to see especially
that this part of the law was carried out, and to have asked them to
report the names of the apprentices and those of their masters[603].
The reports sent in 1634 and 1635 therefore relate especially to the
placing of apprentices and the monthly meetings of the justices.

[603] Vol. 289, 14.

Reports from twenty-one places were sent in between July 17th and July
31st, 1634. In almost every case the justices expressly state that
they hold monthly meetings and bind poor children apprentice[604].
In the year 1635 the statements are more detailed. Between May 20th
and May 30th replies were sent from ten places in eight of which the
names of both apprentices and masters were given[605]. Sometimes
these were numerous; thus at Blandford in Dorset one hundred and
nineteen apprentices were bound in the course of two years[606]; in
one district of Somerset the names of one hundred and sixty-six are
returned[607], while in all ten districts a fair amount of work was
done. Thus in 1634 and 1635 apprenticeship was more insisted upon
than other methods of poor relief and it seems to have been very
generally well administered. We hear of some complaints but not many in
proportion to the number of reports.

[604] Vol. 272.

[605] Vol. 289.

[606] Vol. 289, No. 48.

[607] Vol. 289, No. 20. The hundreds of Whitleigh, Huntspill, Puriton,
North Petherton, Cannington and Andersfield.

We thus see that during the years 1630 to 1639 we have a large amount
of information concerning the administration of the Poor Law. We find
that a great improvement was effected in 1631. We also find that the
area of administration continued to extend into the Northern counties
after 1631: the difference is indicated by the fact that in 1638 it is
exceptional to find a place without a poor rate, whereas in 1631 the
Government spoke of the laws as being almost obsolete in many places.
We see further that sometimes the later reports come from the same
places as the earlier, and that then the administration continues to
be reported as good. Lastly, in regard to apprentices we are told that
the Privy Council made special efforts to enforce the law, and that
all over the country there is evidence that it was enforced though
occasionally without favourable results. There is thus reason to
believe that the efforts made by the central government to enforce the
law were at last successful, and that the period to which we owe the
survival of our English system of poor relief is that of the personal
government of Charles I.

But we have already noticed that not only is this period the critical
time in the history of the poor relief that survived, but in one
respect the poor relief of this period was unique. Many efforts were
made to find work for the unemployed. Relief of this kind was so much
a part of the general system of the time that we have already examined
many instances in which it was administered.

We will first investigate a few more of the reports of 1631, and
we shall find that the improvement effected in all parts of the
administration of poor relief especially concerned the relief of the
ablebodied; we will then examine a detailed report in order to see what
light it throws on the interpretation of the general statements of
other justices, and we will lastly try to find out if relief of this
kind was confined to a few districts, or was administered all over the
country, and also in what parts of the country there was the greatest
need of employment.

[Sidenote: 7. The improvement effected in 1631 especially concerned the
unemployed.]

To begin with cases in which improvement was reported in April 1631.
From a large district of Hertfordshire we hear "we haue already raysed
a stocke in some parishes, and are raysing stocks for the rest to sett
all the poore on worke in this division[608]." In Essex, Richmond,
Bedford and Beverley fresh taxes for this purpose had just been raised,
and at Agbrigg they were still "setlinge such a course for raysinge of
stocke to sett y^e people of able bodies on work[609]."

[608] For the Liberty of St Albans and the hundred of Cashio (excepting
Rickmansworth, Watford and Sarratt), Vol. 188, 43.

[609] _Essex_, Vol. 188, 92. Poor in misery, because clothiers do
not set them to work, but the justices "did cause" the "able men of
parishes" to "raise stockes and meanes to sett their poore on worke."

_Richmond_, Vol. 189, 65. "We haue likewise given direccons for another
assessem^t to be presently made and levyed for the raising of a summe
in grosse for a stocke for the setting to worke suche as are able and
binding and putting forth apprentices w^{ch} occasions haue hitherto
beene supplyed forth of the com(m)on stocke of the towne chamber w^{th}
the making and levying of w^{ch} assessement the overseers are now in
hande."

_Bedford_, Vol. 189, 27, I.

_Beverley_, Vol. 189, 8, X. Stocks were raised for keeping the poor to
work "(viz^t) in St Maryes parish six poundes, in St Martin's parish
sewven poundes, and in St Nicholas parish six pounde, besides the
stocks they form(er)ly had." The poor were employed in spinning hemp.

_Agbrigg_, Vol. 189, 55. The justices sat at Wakefield, yesterday, for
this purpose. The letter is dated April 29, 1631.

At Winchester the same thing is implied: the stock has been put in
a clothier's hands, so that now the poor do not want work[610].
Twenty-eight reports relating not only to measures for corn, but also
for the poor were sent in between April 21st and April 30th 1631. In
seventeen of these the poor were set to work, and in many cases we can
see that the measures have been taken since the receipt of the Book of
Orders of January 1631/2[611].

[610] Vol. 188, 101. Mayor of Winchester, etc., reports to Sheriff of
Hants, "First that wee haue raised and provided a stock of money and
putt it into a clothiers hands to sett the poore people on worke that
are able to worke, and now they doe not want worke."

[611] _State Papers_, Vol. 189. We have already referred to the cases
of Whittlesford, etc. no. 75, Agbrigg no. 55, Braughing no. 80,
Edwinstree and Odsey no. 73, Essex no. 92, Richmond no. 65, Bedford no.
27, and Beverley no. 8, X. Besides these, work was provided in Shepway
(6), Doncaster (8, III.), Mansbridge, Buddlesgate and Soke, Hants.
(11), Co. Nottingham (12), Bramber (16), Clackclose, etc. Norfolk (44),
Borough of Buckingham (60), Alton, Hants. (66), the hundred of Hertford
(79), and Badbury (83). All these places sent reports between April
21st, and 30th, 1631.

In the answers sent in May we have the same kind of information.
In Brixton and Wallington we have a report similar to that from
Hertfordshire; "stockes of mony," we are told, "are raised in moste
of the parishes w^{th}in the said hundrede and burrow and the reste
not yet raised are w^{th} as much expedicon as may bee to bee raised
for buyinge of flax, hempe and other materialls to set the poore to
worke[612]." From Arundel there is a like account, "we haue caused the
taxations for the releefe of the poor to be raised in euery parish in
this time of scarsitye, and haue likewise caused stocks of mony to be
raised in euery parish to buy materialls to sett the poor a warke, and
we haue caused the Statute of Laborors to be inquired after and to be
putt in execution[613]."

[612] Vol. 190, No. 66.

[613] Vol. 191, No. 45.

We can thus see that in 1631 the justices were busy raising stocks to
provide work for the poor, and that in seventeen documents, or more
than half of the reports of the last ten days of April 1631, we are
informed that measures had been taken with this object.

[Sidenote: 8. The detailed report from Bassetlaw throws light upon the
more general statements of the justices.]

We will now examine a more detailed report relating to sixty parishes
of Bassetlaw in County Nottingham and sent in during March 1636/7[614].
In most cases information is given under four headings, first we are
told how many of the impotent poor are relieved, secondly the amount of
the town stock, thirdly how many rogues have been punished, and lastly
how many apprentices have been bound. This document is important
because it seems to indicate the number of parochial officials who
provided work for the unemployed in the district of Bassetlaw. This is
not directly stated in the report, but the overseers return the amount
of the town stock of their parish whenever a town stock existed. From
the method in which the return is made it seems that this town stock
was always used for finding employment for the able-bodied poor[615].
Other methods of dealing with those out of work are also noted, so
that it appears that in forty-five out of sixty parishes the parochial
authorities provided employment for those poor who could work. The
amount of the stock was often quite small; in one case only sixteen
shillings, but it is very possible that in this instance the parish
also was small; in another place the stock consisted of a sum of
about thirty pounds, and the average amount was about three pounds.
This document from Bassetlaw only states in detail what many of the
other reports imply, but the detail is much more convincing, and it is
confirmed by the overseers' accounts from Barnet and Elstree which we
have already examined[616]. It is perhaps worth while to notice that as
early as 1623 the justices wrote from Bassetlaw that work for the poor
was wanting, and they even then ordered that the labourers should be
set to work by the town's stock and the impotent relieved by the public
contribution[617].

[614] Vol. 349, No. 86.

[615] The supposition that the town stock was used in Bassetlaw for
employing the poor seems almost certain for the following reasons:

(1) In the earlier entries this is often directly stated to be the
case. Thus we are told at Laneham that the "towne stocke" was used to
buy hemp "to sett such poore on worke as wante."

(2) When a town stock is reported not to exist other methods of
employing the poor are sometimes mentioned as a reason for the absence
of such a stock, and thus it is implied that a town stock when it
existed was used for this purpose. Thus for example at Grove they have
"no towne stock in regard, theire poore are otherwise sett on worke;"
at Egmonton "Towne stock they haue none because they imploy theire
poore in other worke as they wante;" while at Laxton cum Morehouse
there was no stock because those who wanted work were otherwise
employed "by the towne."

(3) There is an earlier report from Bassetlaw sent in on July 29th,
1636. This report relates to fewer places, but in some respects is
fuller. In eleven cases where only the amount of the stock is noted in
1637, the fact that it was employed to provide work is directly stated
in 1636. Thus for example the following entries occur:

Askham. "Five marks stocke to sett the poore on worke." (20 marks 1637.)

Kirton. "Tenn pounds in Towne stocke wherew^{th} the poore are sett on
worke and two new howses built for them."

Clarebrough (Clarborough). "They have iii^{li} vi^s viii^d towarde
releiueing the poore and setting the(m) on worke."

Misterton cu(m) Stockw^{th} (Stockwith). "That their Towne stocke is
Tenn pounds towards setting their poore on worke and releiveing them."

East Markham. "And that they haue 5^{li} in stocke to sett the poore on
worke." (£7 in 1637.)

Bole. "5^{li} Towne stocke w^{ch} is imployed to sett poore on worke."

Warsopp (Warsop). "They haue in Towne stocke to sett their poore on
worke xi^{li} iiij^s." (£11 in 1637.)

Cuckney. "They have tenn pounds Towne stocke to sett their poore on
worke." (£7 in 1637.)

Carberton (Carburton). "They haue in Stocke to maintain their poore in
worke fifty shillings." (40_s._ in 1637.)

Mattersey. "They haue 5^{li} towne stocke to sett their poore on
worke." (£10 in 1637.)

Eakring. "Tenn pounds in Towne stocke w^{ch} is putt out for vse of
the poore. And the 7^{th} of June the(y) (the overseers) certifie
that they haue raysed xx^s stocke to sett poore on worke and giue
weekely allowance to six poore people," besides 40^s. more for placing
apprentices.

In these eleven cases therefore the town stock was certainly used
for employing the poor. In four other instances, however, a general
statement is made as to the use of the stock which perhaps indicates
that the whole of the stock was not always employed entirely for one
purpose. Thus for example at Eaton £2. 6_s._ 8_d._ was "in stocke for
such poore as should neede." However in no case do these statements
contradict the supposition that the town stock in this district was
partially used for finding employment for the poor, and the direct
statement of the 1636 report in these eleven cases is strong evidence
that in the remaining nine places the stock was used in the same
fashion.

[616] See _supra_, p. 182.

[617] _D. S. P._, James I., Vol. 140, 10. I.

[Sidenote: 9. Local variations in the provision for the unemployed.]

[Sidenote: _a._ Not so extensive in the parts North of the Humber and
in the extreme West.]

We have now to try to find out if it was only in a few counties that
work was found for the unemployed, or if it was all over England. We
have already noted that in the counties north of the Humber, and in the
three western counties of Devonshire, Cornwall, and Wiltshire the poor
law was apparently less well administered than in other parts of the
country. In these counties with the exception of Yorkshire therefore
there are few instances in which stocks are found for providing work
for the unemployed. We hear however that in Ashton-under-Line there
existed a "small stocke of money which is disposed on for the setting
of poore to worke[618]". Moreover, in two Yorkshire reports of 1635 it
is stated that the justices have been "verie carefull to raise stockes
for setting ou^r poore on worke[619]." There are other Yorkshire
returns containing information of the same kind, but still the plan of
finding work for the unemployed of the North seems to be comparatively
unusual.[620]

[618] _D. S. P._, Chas. I., Vol. 395, 106. In the same report it is
stated that Oldham could not afford to raise a stock.

[619] _Ib._, Vol. 293, 122 and 129. The quotation is from a report from
Ryedale signed by Lord Fairfax; the other document, in which almost
exactly the same words occur is from Buckrose in the East Riding.

[620] Although the fact that the poor were employed in Devon and
Wilts is not recorded in any of the justices' reports which have been
preserved, we hear from other sources that work was found for the poor
in some places in those counties. Thus the following memorandum refers
to an attempt to establish a workhouse in Plymouth; it is to be found
among the municipal records in that town. "In the name of god the 28th
of September an^o 1610 A note of provisio^{ns} delivred into y^e Castle
for the pore to thende they maye be there placed & sett on work, w^ch
is but abeginninge for a fewe & a tryall thereof the w^ch I praie god
continewe and augment to his glorye & their comfort.

         Imprimis      2 bedsteads

         *       *       *       *       *

  5 twines      2 paire of wollen cards" &c.

Two years later £20 was bequeathed by W. Lawrence "to the stocke
to sett y^e poor to worke," and early in the reign of Charles I. a
"workehowse for the setting of the poore on worke" has been lately
built and the overseers paid the corporation £9. 12_s._ for the rent
of the three tenements which formerly had existed on the site. R. N.
Worth, _Plymouth Municipal Records_, pp. 156 and 257, and _Hist. of
Plymouth_, p. 273.

In Marlborough also there was certainly a workhouse, for a petition was
presented to the Privy Council in the name of the Mayor and burgesses
concerning John Thorner, an Attorney-at-Law, who "was rated among
others to pay 52/- towards the erecting of a workhouse and raising
of a stock for the employment of the poore that are able and willing
to worke to be paid at three general payments whereof one is already
passed at our Lady day last." Thorner had refused to pay his rate,
"saying that it was against the law," and had encouraged others not
to pay, so "that manie of the inhabitants there made refusall also to
pay their proportion." The Privy Council referred the matters to the
judges, and in the mean time the rate was to be paid. _Privy Council
Register_, 13th May, 1631.

But with regard to the rest of England this is not the case. In
every county except Northampton some justices state that they have
found employment for the poor. As we might expect this was done most
frequently in the towns and in the manufacturing counties, both because
in these places there were more rich people and because there were also
more unemployed owing to the greater fluctuations of trade.

[Sidenote: 9 _b_. Provision of work more necessary in the towns than in
the country.]

A report from Reading and Theale illustrates this: "Wee finde that the
able poore in boddy to worke and w^{ch} are in country villages and
hambletts haue theire ymploymt in husbondrie and by that meanes are
mayntayned; other lyen in such countrie townes, populer, incorporate,
where heretofore multitudes of such able persons haue lived by worke
from the clothier, now through the defect and decaye of that trade and
soe consequently of the clothier, thousands of these poore formerlie
relieved by worke liue in much want and could hardlie subsist this
deere yeare did not many extend theire charity even beyond their
meanes[621]." Newbury and Abingdon were also towns in the same
neighbourhood subject to similar conditions, and we know already that
workhouses were founded in both these places and in Reading itself
also[622]. Shrewsbury and Hereford are fair examples of more westernly
towns. At Shrewsbury the justices report in June 1631 that they "are
aboute a course to sett all the poore on worke within our Towne
and Libertyes[623]," and in 1638 an order was made for regulating
a workhouse there[624]. About the same time the Mayor of Hereford
records that "there is a colleccon made in euerie severall parish
w^{th}in the said Cyttie, and competent somes raysed for to releive
the impotent and needy, and a stocke for the setting of poore able
people to worke and for the placeing of youth apprentices[625]." Other
magistrates report in like manner: thus in the rape of Hastings they
have caused the officers "as much as in them lyeth to see the said
poore inhabitants bee duely kept to worke and haue fitting materialls
provided for them[626]." In the hundred of Hertford the justices state
in 1631 that the more populous places have already raised stocks of
money to set the poor to work, and that they are still trying to induce
all the others to do so though a few are not rich enough to bear the
necessary taxation[627]. From St Albans, Reigate, Ipswich, Maidstone,
Lynn, and Norwich, as well as from more inland towns we have similar
information: the magistrates of Bedford write that "we haue raysed
divers extraordenary taxes for the reliefe of our poore and settinge
them on worke and therby they are set to worke[628]." But perhaps the
Buckingham report indicates the most thorough organisation. There the
poor had been visited apparently in the same way as at Norwich. Five
hundred people were examined; the age and occupation of each were
noted, and whether they had work or not. Afterwards employment was
provided for those who needed it and we are told that the poor "of good
disposicon are glad they are thus settled w^{th}out begging and settle
themselves seriouslie to their labo^r." This good result however was
not obtained without complaints from the ratepayers[629].

[621] _Dom. State Papers_, Vol. 191, 40. II.

[622] See above.

[623] _D. S. P._ Vol. 194, 17. III. 14th June.

[624] The orders of the corporation of Shrewsbury, "That a stock be
raised for setting the poor on work and the Castle be repaired and
imployed for that purpose." _Shropshire Archæological Journal_, XI. p.
169.

[625] _D. S. P._, Vol. 194, 41. II. See below for Shaftesbury,
Leominster, Gloucester, Banbury, Abergavenny, &c.

[626] _Dom. State Papers_, Vol. 188, 34.

[627] _Ib._, Vol. 189, 79.

[628] _Ib._, Vol. 189, 27.

[629] _Ib._, Vol. 189, 60, and 187, 2.

In the country districts also employment seems to have been provided
as well as in the towns whenever the poor suffered much from the want
of work. In the western counties, however, there were few complaints
of lack of employment, except from the cloth-workers when the trade
in cloth was slack. Some justices expressly state that there is no
want of work in their part of the country. Thus from a large district
of Somerset we hear that there are "none lefte unplaced but such as
doe mainetaine their charge by their labor[630]." Therefore, as we
should expect, in many reports from the West nothing is said about
finding employment for the able-bodied poor. There are, however, also
a fair number of cases in which work is said to be provided. This is
especially the case in the counties of Shropshire and Stafford; thus
from Staffordshire three reports were sent in 1634, and in all three we
are told that the poor were set to work[631]. Moreover, the Worcester
justices write that "wee are carefull ... that the able poore bee
well provided of worke[632]" and in almost all[633] the other western
counties, at least one instance of the kind is reported[634].

[630] Vol. 192, 48. Hundreds of Whitley, North Petherton, Cannington,
Andersfield, Huntspill and Puriton. See also Vol. 289, 57. Unnamed
division of Somerset, "The poore are well set on worke as farre as we
doe or have taken knowledge of by our best enquiryes."

[631] _Dom. State Papers_, Vol. 272, 61, July 25th, 1634. Pirehill, co.
Stafford. "And we haue and doe take course to provide for and to sett
on worke the poore of the several parishes within the said hundred."

_Ib._, Vol. 272, No. 65. Offlow. "We caused poore people to be sett on
worke."

_Ib._, Vol. 272, No. 66. Totmonslow. We "further haue takein course to
provide for and sett on worke the poore of the severall parishes."

[632] Limits of Worcester, _Ib._, Vol. 349, 73, 9th Mar. 1636/7.

[633] The exceptions are Devon, Wilts, and Cornwall. See note above.

[634] This question is so much one of detail that it is perhaps worth
while to refer to one justice's report from almost every western
county, some from towns, and some from the country:

1. _Berks._ June 1631. Abingdon. _Ib._, Vol. 195, 7. "We haue erected
in our borough a workehouse to sett poore people to worke."

2. _Cheshire._ Edisbury, June 29th, 1631. Vol. 195, 21. The justices
order "stockes of money and wares" to be raised, but find the people
averse to find money for any such purpose.

3. _Derby._ Appletree. 185, 41. Feb. 1630/1. See below.

4. _Dorset._ Shaftesbury. 188, 67. April 1631. "Haue made provision
and taken orders for settinge to worke of such idle persons and poore
people as are of able bodies and strength to bee ymployed in trades and
labor."

5. _Gloucester._ June 1631. Vol. 194, No. 11, I. Gloucester. "For
those that are of abillitie to worke we haue provided them meanes to
sett them on w(orke) soe they may lyve by their labor w^{th}out beinge
further chargable to others."

6. _Hants._ Kingclere. Nov. 1633. Vol. 250, 11, IV. "The justices"
have taken order that such as are able to worke are imployed in their
several parishes."

7. _Hereford._ Leominster. June 1631. Vol. 194, 41, III. "Item the
poore are provided for and such kept at work that are able to work."

8. _Monmouth._ Ragland. July 3rd, 1634. Vol. 271, 17. The justices
since the commission have levied sums of money in every parish and
township to buy "woole, flaxe and other necessaries towards the setting
of poore to woorke."

9. _Oxford._ J. Ps. for co. Oxford, Vol. 188, 96. April 19, 1630. Have
not omitted to provide "stockes" to "sett able poore on worke."

10. _Shropshire._ Bishop's Castle. Vol. 223, 39. 3rd Oct. 1632. "Here
is herin but one church wherin are churchwardens, ouerseers of the
poore duely elected and nominated; and monthly now we meete and we take
order for mayntenance of the poore by setting the able to work and
relief of the impotent."

11. _Somerset._ Frome, Kilmerston, Wellow and the adjoining districts.
Vol. 185, 40. Feb. 1630/1. The justices have seen to the relief of the
poor and setting them to work.

12. _Warwick._ Knightlow. Vol. 199, 65. 13 Sept. 1631. "The Constables,
Churchwardens and Ouerseers for the poore in the rest of the townes
in theis two divisions doe certfie vs that all ys well ... the poore
are sett on worke and releiued and wee heare noe complaints to the
contrarie."

[Sidenote: (_d_) Provision of work in many districts in most counties of
the east.]

But in the east and south-east there was at any rate sometimes a
chronic want of employment, and consequently numerous efforts to
provide for the able-bodied poor. In the country round Hitchen we are
told, as in the Reading district, that it is the poor in the town
that are distressed, but in the hamlets the farmers find work for the
inhabitants. The justices say they have no manufacture, and they do
not know how to find a remedy for the people in the town. At one time
they make the richer people employ the poor, but they do not find the
experiment successful[635]. We have also an account of a permanent want
of employment in a large district of Norfolk. In the hundreds of South
Greenhoe, Wayland, and Grimshoe provision had been made by raising a
stock to set the able-bodied poor to work, and besides the magistrates
write, "Wee have manie young people w^{ch} live out of service by
reason of the multitude of them, there not being services for them, but
worke is provided for them in their seuerall parishes[636]."

[635] _D. S. P._, Vol. 427, 3. 1st Aug. 1639, Vol. 385, 43, and 349, 70.

[636] _Ib._, Vol. 385, 27. March 5, 1637/8.

There are very many reports of stocks for the provision of work in
other country districts of the east. In Hertfordshire, Suffolk,
Norfolk, and Cambridge there is much to make us think the system was
nearly general[637], and in each of the other eastern counties there
are many cases of the kind.

[637] _Herts._ Edwinstree and Odsey. _Ib._, Vol. 426, 73. July 29,
1639. The justices "haue directed stocks of money to be raised where
need is to sett the poore on worke." See also above for hundreds of
Hertford and Braughing, St Albans borough, and liberty of St Albans.

_Suffolk._ Hartismere. Vol. 349, 12. March 1636/7. "Those who are able
to worke and cannot provide worke for themselues are sett to worke."

Cosford. Vol. 395, 35. July, 1638. The justices have "bin careful for
the setting of poore people work," etc.

Hundreds of Loes, Wilford, Thredling and Plomesgate. 13th July, 1638.
Vol. 395, No. 55. See App. XII.

Also Hundreds of Carlford and Colneis. Vol. 395, 62. July, 1638, and
Ipswich, Vol. 195, 45.

_Norfolk._ South Erpingham and Eynsford. July, 1638. Vol. 395, 90. The
justices have "taken care ... for the employment of the able," &c.

Division not mentioned. July, 1634. "We haue caused stockes to be
raysed in the severall parishes of our limitts to sett the poore beinge
able of bodye to worke." Vol. 272, 60.

For Freebridge Lynn, Freebridge Marshland and Clackclose; South
Greenhoe, Wayland, and Grimshoe; and also Lynn, see above.

_Cambridge._ Hundreds of Cheveley, Staploe, Staine and Flendish
(formerly all in Cambs.), "Item wee find upon our inquiry that the
seuerall towne Stockes within o^r diuision are orderly imployed and
accounted for and the poore of the seueral parishes sett one worke and
imployed therin according to the Lawe." Vol. 285, 99. March, 1635.
Chesterton, Papworth and North Stowe. 216, 45. See App. XII. Radfield,
Chilford and Whittlesford. Vol. 395, 114, and Cambridge borough. See
above.

In a district of Middlesex the unemployed were sent to fight for
Gustavus Adolphus[638], but in most parishes materials were provided
for them to work up. Thus in several hundreds in Kent "stocks of
materialls" were provided in every parish[639]; in Nottinghamshire
those out of service and able to work were set to work "on the towne
stock[640]," while at Horncastle sessions, in Lincolnshire, the
justices take "special care ... that the abler sort bee constantly
sett on worke by the stocke of the parishe[641]." Sometimes the sum
expended was very considerable if we take into account the great
difference in the value of money. Thus in Wallington, Surrey, more than
£120 was used for providing work, while nearly fifty pounds remained
in hand[642]. On the whole therefore in the eastern counties, between
1631 and 1640, it seems that considerable sums of money were raised and
employed in most districts[643] with the object of setting to work the
able-bodied poor.

[638] 24th Oct. 1631. _Ib._, Vol. 202, 20. Report for Clerkenwell,
S^t Sepulchre, S^t Giles, Islington, Finchley, Friarne, etc. "There
is alsoe in the house of Correccon a manufacture prepared and by a
charitable stocke of a hundred pounds given by S^r John Fenner Knight
nowe in readynes an Artizan, who hath Articled and agreed w^{th} vs to
take, instructe & bringe vp in the saide manufacture as apprentices
twenty poore orphans boyes and Girles such as before wandred in the
streetes and weare readie to perishe for wante of imployment." "Many
idle and loose persons haue byn lately imployed and sent to serue under
his ma^{tie} of Sweden and such others as are taken up in watches or
Privie Searches w^{th}in o^r division are continually settled in some
course of life or sent to the howse of Correccon." See also Appendix
XII.

[639] Ruxley, Little, Lesnex, Axton, and the vill of Dartford and
Wilmington. _D. S. P._, Chas. I., Vol. 220, 14. July 4th, 1632.

[640] _Ib._, Vol. 272, 40. July, 1634.

[641] _Ib._, Vol. 349, 113. March, 1636/7.

[642] _D. S. P._, Vol. 315, 25. March, 1635.

  "Item. Money disbursed      }
  to set the poore on woorke. }                                cxxii^{li} iijs.

  Itm. Moneys in stocke for the settinge of the poore to worke.  xxxxvii^{li}."

[643] The following are instances in which work for the poor was
provided in some district in every other eastern county:

_Sussex._ Rape of Bramber. _Ib._, Vol. 189, 16. April, 1631. The
justices "haue compelled some that misspent their tyme to fall to labor
and haue provided worke for them and others that alleaged they wanted
worke."

_Bedford._ See above.

_Bucks._ Boro' of Buckingham. Vol. 201, 13. 3rd Oct., 1631. "Our poore
are kept to work and o^r stock is still going, wee have noe poore that
begg." Oct. 3rd, 1631. See above also.

_Essex._ Vol. 188, 92. April, 1631. Great want of work; the justices
"haue not only delt w^{th} the able men of parishes to prouide and laie
in corne for prouision of the poore at under-rates but did cause them
to raise stockes and meanes to sett their poore on worke."

_Hunts._ Hundred of Hurstington. Vol. 329, 83. 1636. Signed by Sir
Oliver Cromwell, H. Cromwell and Robert Audeley. The justices called
before them the overseers of the poor and caused them "to render vs
an accompt what stocks of money haue beene raysed for settinge the
poore on worke and howe the poore haue beene releiued. Whoe haue made
it appear before vs that the statute in this case hath beene duely
obserued throughout the said hundred."

_Leicester._ West Goscote. Vol. 349, 35. March, 1636/7. The justices
relieve and set to work poor people, punish rogues, and put all
instructions of the Book of orders into execution, "w^{ch} course wee
finde very beneficiall and much conducinge to the generall quiett and
goode of the countrey and wee therefore w^{th} more cheerefullnes
addresse ourselues thereunto."

_Lincolnshire._ Horncastle Sessions. Vol. 349, 113. 14th March, 1636/7.
The justices "haue taken speciall care ... that the abler sorte bee
constantly sett on worke by the stocke of the parishe."

_Rutland._ Vol. 185, 55. Feb., 1630/1. The justices state that "order
is taken (according to lawe) for reliefe and setting to worke of poore
and impotent people."

[Sidenote: 10. Summary.]

We have thus seen that in 1631 the improvement in the administration
of poor relief concerned especially the relief of the able-bodied
poor, and we have noted many instances in which taxes were raised for
this purpose at that time. We have also examined a detailed report
from a particular district in the county of Nottingham in which in
forty-five out of sixty parishes some provision seems to have been made
for finding employment for the poor. Moreover, we find that the plan
of providing work for the unemployed was reported from some district
of every county south of the Humber except Cornwall, Northampton,
Devon, and Wilts; and in Devon and Wilts also the same plan was tried,
although no report of the justices has been preserved. This form of
poor relief thus seems to have been frequently in use in the towns
of both east and west, and in the country districts of the eastern
counties also. It was not quite so general in the country districts of
the west, but still was not infrequent even there.

We may, therefore, say that from 1631 to 1640 we had more poor relief
in England than we ever had before or since. We shall try to estimate
later how far this system was successful. But we will now see what
happened to the organisation of English poor relief during the Civil
War. We will also trace the history of poor relief in France and
Scotland during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, in order that
we may see that the history of poor relief in England is unique.




CHAPTER XIII.

POOR RELIEF IN FRANCE, SCOTLAND, AND ENGLAND DURING THE CIVIL WAR AND
COMMONWEALTH.

  § 1. Lax administration of poor relief in England during the years of
Civil War.
     _a._ Decline of charitable institutions.
     _b._ Neglect in execution of ordinary law.
     _c._ Instances of corrupt practices.
  § 2. Attempts to regain a good organisation of poor relief under the
Commonwealth.
  § 3. Reasons why disorganisation especially affected the provision of
work for the unemployed.
  § 4. State of poor relief after the Restoration.
  § 5. Reasons for failure under the Commonwealth to restore the old
state of things.
  § 6. History of legislation on poor relief in Scotland,
     _a._ Before 1597.
     _b._ Between 1597-1680.
  § 7. Failure of administration of poor relief in Scotland during the
seventeenth century.
    _a._ Responses of the Scotch justices to the orders of Council in
1623 show that they were unable or unwilling to enforce the poor law
themselves and left it to the kirk sessions.
    _b._ Inadequate poor relief granted by the kirk sessions of Banff.
    _c._ Relief of the poor in Aberdeen shows that the relief considered
sufficient by the municipal rulers was double that which could be
granted from the funds at the disposal of the kirk sessions.
    _d._ Infrequency of assessment in Scotland before 1818.
    _e._ Insufficiency of relief during the years 1692-1699.
    _f._ Prevalence of begging in Scotland.
    _g._ Reasons for the failure of Scotch administration.
 § 8. The history of poor relief in France.
 § 9. Comparison between the history of poor relief in England and that
in France and Scotland.


The histories of poor relief in England after the Civil War, and
in France and in Scotland throughout the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries, both compare and contrast with the history of English
poor relief in the period from 1529 to 1644. While in each of these
cases like circumstances produced similar attempts to afford relief,
in none did both an energetic Privy Council and a vigorous system of
local officials coexist, and consequently in each case poor laws were
in existence but were badly administered. The course of events in all
these instances will therefore confirm the view that the survival of
the English system of poor relief is owing to the organisation which
was enforced by the English justices and was created by the Book of
Orders of 1631.

In England the justices' reports concerning the administration of the
poor cease after the year 1639. After that date either no more reports
were sent or no care was taken to preserve them. The cessation of
these documents probably marks the time when the system created by the
Book of Orders began to disappear. Other and more pressing matters
engaged the attention of the Privy Council, and were subjects for
the special inquiries of the judges of assize. The justices devoted
their zeal and attention to raising troops or to meeting the great
demands in money made by both King and Parliament, while constables and
overseers were used as collectors, not only of funds for the relief of
the poor, but also of the revenues needed by the armies[644]. Under
these circumstances the system created by the Book of Orders fell
to pieces, and the whole administration of poor relief became lax.
Still the effect of the execution of the Book of Orders remained. For
nine years the overseers had been drilled by the justices, and the
parishioners had been compelled to pay rates. The inhabitants had
become accustomed to the organisation, and that part of it continued
which was most easily enforced by the overseers, and which seemed to
them most urgently necessary. The impotent were still relieved, and
children were still apprenticed, though less efficiently than before,
but the able-bodied poor were no longer found with work, except in a
few isolated cases.

[644] The Collectors responsible to Parliament for the gathering of the
subsidies for the war were the overseers and petty constables in each
parish.

We will first examine part of the evidence bearing upon the lax
administration of the whole system of poor relief and some of the
efforts which were made under the Commonwealth to restore the old state
of things. Sometimes we hear of the disorganisation of semi-voluntary
charities; at other times of the bad administration of the laws for
the poor; occasionally of fraudulent practices in connection with
charitable endowments.

[Sidenote: 1. Lax administration of system of Poor Relief in England
during the years of the Civil War.

_a._ Decline of charitable institutions.]

The four royal hospitals of London are the most conspicuous instances
of charities which were under public management, but only partly
supported by public contributions. We get from them several complaints
of a partial break-down owing to the Civil War, and the figures
furnished by the Governors speak for themselves. In 1641 there were
over nine hundred children in Christ's Hospital, in 1647 there were
only five hundred and ninety-seven; at Thomas's Hospital, in 1641,
over a thousand patients were relieved, and in 1647 only six hundred
and eighty-two; at St Bartholomew's and Bridewell the numbers had
also decreased[645]. The Governors of Christ's Hospital give us their
estimate of the reasons for this. We are told that "in respect of
the troubles of the times, the meanes of the said Hospital hath very
much failed for want of charitable Benevolences which formerly have
beene given, and are now ceased; and very few legacies are now given
to hospitals, the rents and revenues thereunto belonging being also
very ill paid by the tenants, who are not able to hold their leases by
reason of their quartering and billetting of soldiers and the taking
away of their corne and cattell from them[646]." A few years later
the billeting had apparently ceased, but the tenants then suffered
"by reason of the severall charges and taxes laid upon them[647]."
Even in 1653 we are informed that the revenues of Christ's Hospital
"hath divers wayes fallen very short of means formerly received, viz.
heretofore many have given monies privateley, others very bountifull
at their deaths. And several parishes in London have sent in large
contributions and now but one that sends anything at all[648]."
The Civil War had reduced many of the richer classes to poverty,
and probably most institutions which were maintained by private
contributions would suffer in the same manner as Christ's Hospital in
London.

[645] The Reports of the Four Royal Hospitals for 1641 and 1647.
_King's Pamphlets_, Brit. Mus. 669, f. 4, No. 5, and f. 11, No. 5.

In 1641 there had been 1002 patients in St Bartholomew's, and 711
vagrants in Bridewell.

In 1647 there had been 901 in St Bartholomew's and 575 vagrants in
Bridewell.

[646] Report of the Four Royal Hospitals for 1645. _King's Pamphlets_,
British Museum, 669, f. 10, No. 26. Similar reasons are also alleged in
the report of 1644. _Ib._, No. 2.

[647] _Ib._, 1649, 669, f. 14, No. 11.

[648] _King's Pamphlets_, 1653, 669, f. 16, No. 94.

[Sidenote: 1 _b._ Neglect in execution of ordinary law.]

There are also complaints and instances of the bad administration of
the ordinary law. One of these is contained in the ordinance of the
Lords of 1646/7. The Lord Mayor in the City and the justices and judges
in the country are to put in execution the laws concerning the poor
and rogues, because "by reason of the unhappy distractions of these
times the putting of the Lawes into execution have been altogether
neglected[649]."

[649] "An Order for putting in execution the laws against vagabonds
made by the Lords in Parliament assembled." _King's Pamphlets_, 669, f.
9, No. 81, Mar. 5th, 1646/7. See also an Act of the Commons of England
in Parliament assembled for the relief and employment of the poor and
the punishing of vagrants, 1650.

Numerous resolutions tell us that the state of the London streets had
become almost unbearable. The vagrants hung on coaches and begged
clamorously at the doors of churches and private houses[650]: moreover
not only did men gather in tumultuous assemblies "by playing at
football or otherwise," but many "loose and vagrant persons" also had
been found to wander, who, "under colour of begging in the day time,"
did pilfer and steal, and in the night time "did break into houses and
shops to the scandall of the governmente of this City[651]."

[650] Order issued "By the Mayor," 1655. _King's Pamphlets_, 669,
f. 20, No. 21. "Whereas by neglect of executing the good lawes and
statutes against rogues, vagabonds and sturdy beggars, that vermine of
the Commonwealth doth now swarme in and about this City and Liberties
disturbing and annoying the inhabitants and passengers, by hanging upon
Coaches, and clamorous begging at the doores of Churches and private
Houses and in the streets and Common Wayes; beguiling the modest
laborious and honest poore (the proper objects of charity) of much
reliefe and alms etc." 23rd Jan., 1655/6.

[651] "By the Mayor." Lord Mayor's Proclamations, No. 18.

In 1652 several resolutions were passed by Parliament on the matter,
and a committee was appointed to consider how the poor might be
employed, to revive the laws concerning the poor and setting them to
work, and "to consider by what means or default the same are become
ineffectual or are not put in execution[652]."

[652] _Votes of Parliament, Tuesday the seven and twentieth of April,
1652_, "For setting the Poor on work and for preventing of Common
Begging." _King's Pamphlets_, 669, f. 16, No. 49.

These resolutions and these complaints at once show that the
administration had become lax, and that there had formerly been a time
in which these laws had "not become ineffectual," and were put in
execution.

[Sidenote: 1 _c_. Instances of corrupt practices.]

There are other cases in which there seems to have been evidence
of corruption. The Chester Hospital, we are told, had been much
neglected[653]; in 1653 we hear also that persons counterfeited the
Letters Patent and orders of the Council of State for licenses to
collect money for charitable purposes, so that people were cheated,
and it was necessary to pass a special resolution of Parliament on the
subject[654]. A curious instance of corruption in the administration
of charitable funds appears at Barnstaple. Many sums of money had been
bequeathed there as elsewhere for the purpose of enabling a young
craftsman or trader to set up business on his own account. Some time
before the war the town rulers found it difficult to find young men
who could furnish good security, and so lent part of the money to more
prosperous manufacturers, who, they said, set the poor inhabitants to
work. But in 1653 the money was altogether misapplied; the Corporation
bought some gold maces, found they had no funds to pay for them, and so
ordered the debt to be paid with this endowment[655]. Apparently the
money was never paid back, for payments on account of it cease after
this time.

[653] _Calendar of State Papers_, Dec. 22, 1657.

[654] _Ib._, Sept. 9, 1653. The order is to the effect that the Council
of State is to take care to suppress and prevent the like abuse in the
future.

[655] Barnstaple Records, _North Devon Herald_, April 22, 1880.

Any one of these instances of fraud and neglect might have occurred at
any time, but so many receive official notice when peace was restored
that they must have occurred more frequently during the war than at
other times. A letter of this period seems to indicate the opinion of
contemporaries: "You speak of feasts to relieve the poor, but it is
well if the money left long since for the poor be given to them and not
to feasts[656]."

[656] _Calendar of State Papers_, Aug. 12, 1658.

[Sidenote: 2. Attempts to regain a good organisation of poor relief
under the Commonwealth.]

As soon as the Commonwealth was fairly well established many efforts
were made to relieve the poor of London. As early as 1647 a new
organisation was established, named the Corporation of the Poor, which
was empowered to erect workhouses and Houses of Correction[657].
Something seems to have been done by the members of this body. The
store-house situated in the Minories and the Wardrobe-house were
granted to them, and here orphans were maintained and many hundred of
poor families were employed and relieved by the Corporation by spinning
and weaving, "and," they tell us, "whosoever doth repair, either to the
Wardrobe near Blackfriars, or to Heiden House in the Minories, may have
Materials of Flax, Hemp or Towe to spin at their own houses if it be
desired, leaving so much money as the said Materials cost, until it be
brought again in Yarn; at which time they shall receive money for their
work and more Materials to imploy them; so that a stock of 12_d._ or
14_d._ will be a sufficient security for any that will be imployed; and
every one is paid according to the fineness or coursness in the Yarn
they spin: there being a certain rule of Length and Tale to pay every
one by, so that none are necessitated to live idly, that are desirous
or willing to work[658]."

[657] _An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament
for the constant reliefe and Imployment of the Poore and the Punishment
of Vagrants and other disorderly persons in the City of London. 17 Dec.
1647._

[658] Note to song "Poor Outcast Children's Song and Cry" published
1653. _King's Pamphlets_, 669, f. 16-95.

But the President and Corporation of the Poor were soon hindered
in their work by want of funds, and were not at all successful
in maintaining order in the London streets[659]. Their greatest
difficulty seems to have been in 1656, and they try an interesting
experiment. Many pamphlets of this century concern the fishing trade
and were written to urge the English to keep it from the Dutch. Some of
the writers consider the fitting out of fishing-boats the best means of
setting the poor of the nation to work[660]. The plan now was actually
attempted; three busses or fishing smacks were taken from the Dutch and
granted to this Corporation for the purpose of employing the poor[661].

[659] Resolutions of Common Council, 6th March, 1656, and 1st April,
1657. Lord Mayor's Proclamation Book, Nos. 14 and 17. The first
resolution sets forth the fact that the Corporation have not funds
sufficient for employing the constables necessary for clearing the
streets; a special rate was to be levied to assist them.

[660] _Britaine's Busse_, 1615. Eden, I., p. 148, and _Provision for
the Poore_, 1649. _King's Pamphlets_, 669, f. 14.

[661] _Calendar of State Papers_, Sept. 2, 1652.

But still the help given was but small; several committees were
appointed by the Council of State, but few decisions were reached;
the measures of relief only concerned London and not the whole of the
country, and even in London comparatively little was accomplished. In
spite of the new orphanage at the Wardrobe few children were educated
there, probably because no money could be got. The hymn sung by the
children implores Parliament to redress the matter:

    "Grave Senators that sit on high
    Let not poor English Children die
    And droop on Dunghils with lamenting notes;
    An Act for Poor's Relief they say
    Is coming forth; why's this delay?
    O let not Dutch, Danes, Devils stop those
    Votes[662]."

[662] Poor Outcast Children's Song and Cry. _King's Pamphlets_, 669, f.
16-93.

The work of the Corporation of the Poor continued, but it never
seems to have been great or to have grappled seriously even with
the London poor. In the rest of the country there was probably the
same disorganisation, and less attempt to remedy matters. At Great
Yarmouth the burgesses apparently thought that the spoils of Norwich
Cathedral might be used for the purpose: they petitioned Parliament
to "be pleased to grant vs such a part of the lead and other vseful
materialls of that vast and altogether vseles Cathedrall in Norwich
towardes building of a works house to employ our almost sterued poore
and repairing our peeres etc.[663]"

[663] _Hist. Man. Com. Rep._, IX. App. p. 320. Part of the proceeds of
Lichfield Cathedral seem actually to have been granted to the poor of
Stafford, though the poor had not received any benefit from the grant
because the money had remained in private hands. We are told that
the House of Correction at Stafford was much defaced, though it had
formerly been used as a place "to set the poor on work." _Cal. of State
Papers._ Feb. 17, 1654. Here we can see the process of disorganisation.
The place had been used for the unemployed, but fell into decay during
the war; attempts were made to restore it under the Commonwealth, but
so far they were not successful.

[Sidenote: 3. Reasons why disorganisation especially affected the
provision of work for the unemployed.]

There were many reasons why this disorganisation should especially
affect the plans for the employment of the able-bodied poor.

Even if efforts for this purpose had been much needed after the
outbreak of the Civil War it is probable that they would have been
less enforced than other parts of the system of poor relief. We see
from the justices' reports that schemes of this kind were not usually
undertaken, except under pressure from the justices. The privation
of the helpless old and young appealed far more to the sympathy of
overseers and ratepayers than the needs of the able-bodied poor.
Besides it was far easier to grant pensions than to superintend work
and supply materials.

But a far stronger reason existed for the discontinuance of the
parochial stocks for employing the poor. The necessities of the war
made enormous demands upon the able-bodied males of the population.
The Parliamentary army was recruited from the men above the age of
sixteen and below the age of sixty. An attempt has been made to make
a rough estimate of the proportion of Hertfordshire men drawn away by
the war. If in 1642 the population of Hertfordshire was about one-sixth
of that of the present time it would amount to about 36,000 men, women
and children, and this would mean about 9,000 men of an age fit for
active service. But in the summer of 1644 apparently between four and
five thousand Hertfordshire men were serving in the Parliamentary army
and others with the Royalists, so that a large portion of the work of
the country would necessarily have to be done by women, old men and
boys[664].

[664] A. Kingston, _Herts. during the Great Civil War_, p. 182.

This calculation is very rough, but it probably approximates to the
truth. We hear from the complaints of the time that much inconvenience
was felt. In 1644 the Grand Jury of Hertford Quarter Sessions beg that
"in regard their harvest is at hand and their labourers few to gather
it, some part of their soldiers ... may be for a while recalled to
assist herein." The Committee of the Eastern counties about the same
time write that they have promised that some of the Hertfordshire men
shall return "considering the necessity of their attendance upon their
harvest[665]."

[665] _Ib._, pp. 54 and 55.

The drain on the supply of labourers might not have been so great in
all districts and at all times, but it must have been considerable; the
problem to be solved would therefore be to find workmen and not to find
work. The difficulty of getting men is indicated by the fact that the
Parliamentary army offered two and sixpence a day to a waggoner instead
of the shilling or one and threepence usual before the war[666]. All
who were not altogether incapable could get employment, and there would
therefore be no need for the parochial stocks of materials.

[666] _Ib._, p. 187.

[Sidenote: 4. State of poor relief after the Restoration.]

We should therefore expect that the lax administration during the war
would affect the schemes for the employment of the poor more than any
other part of the organisation, and the evidence of many treatises
published between the Restoration and the Revolution show us that this
was the case. Order had been somewhat restored, and the impotent poor
were then relieved, but the practice of finding work had so much fallen
into disuse that its former existence was almost forgotten. Thus in
a pamphlet published in 1673, called "The grand Concern of England
explained[667]," the writer states that the money paid for the poor
at that time amounted to £840,000 a year, and "is employed only to
maintain idle persons." He proposed that instead of giving the poor
weekly allowance, both old and young should be set to work at spinning,
or some similar occupation. Another treatise, published in 1683, has
been attributed to Sir Matthew Hale[668], and likewise shows that
little was then done for the able-bodied poor. The author says, "Indeed
there are rates made for the impotent poor.... But it is rare to see
any provision of a stock in any Parish for the relief of the poor." The
word "stock" is here used in the sense of capital for the employment
of the poor, and this writer also states that the law provides that
sums of this kind should be so raised. He gives many reasons for the
neglect in the matter. One of these is that there was no authority in
the Justices of Peace or other superintendent officials to compel the
raising of a stock where the churchwardens and overseers neglected
it. Both practice and opinion as to the requirements of the law had
considerably altered since in 1629 the Privy Council told the justices
that it was the opinion of all the judges that they both had the power
and the right to levy stocks to set the poor on work, and since in
1631 the justices from all parts sent in the reports on the Book of
Orders[669].

[667] Harleian Miscellany, viii. p. 582, quoted by Eden, p. 188.

[668] Eden, Vol. I., p. 216.

[669] See above.

The author of a pamphlet of 1685[670] also points out that by the law
of Elizabeth the parish was bound to provide "work for those that will
labour, punishment for those that will not, and bread for those that
cannot; and if the first two parts of that law were duly observed the
Poor would not only be reduced to a small number comparatively to what
they now are, but there would be no such poor as idle and wandering
rogues and vagabonds." The writer further complains that work was not
provided for those who will labour, but only bread both for those who
can and those who cannot labour. These pamphlets thus afford abundant
proof that the plan of raising a stock had fallen into disuse in the
reign of Charles II., and few efforts were made to employ the poor
until new workhouses were founded in different towns, each by separate
Acts of Parliament.

[670] Eden, Vol. I., p. 225.

[Sidenote: 5. Reasons for failure under the Commonwealth to restore
the old state of things.]

This disorganisation, we have seen, was owing to the Civil War. It
is easy to see that when the war was ended, it would be difficult
to restore the old state of things because the old conditions were
altered. The Privy Council after the Restoration had a much less
paternal method of governing, and moreover the nation had outgrown the
old methods of organisation: the Council of State of the Commonwealth
did however try to restore some of the old remedies.

But under the Commonwealth the justices could no longer have been as
efficient instruments for carrying out the poor law as before. Many
of those who had formerly had most local influence were in banishment
or disgrace; others had lost heavily by the sacrifices made for the
war. Probably those who remained were chiefly interested in the more
exciting political and religious questions of the time. But without an
energetic Council and vigorous and powerful justices acting in sympathy
with them, the administration of the poor law had been ineffectual in
the reign of Elizabeth and in that of James I. We should therefore
expect the same result under the Commonwealth and Charles II., except
for the difference made by the ten years in which the relief of the
poor had been efficient. The whole of the improvement was not lost, but
enough of it to show how much the execution of the law had depended on
the Book of Orders, and enough to make the poor relief granted in the
years immediately preceding the war different from that of any future
time.

[Sidenote: 6. History of Legislation on poor relief in Scotland.]

We will now briefly glance at the history of poor relief in Scotland.
Prof. Ashley has shown us that poor laws were not at first peculiarly
English institutions. In every country of Western Europe like
difficulties seem to have occurred at about the same time. Every one
of these countries was developing in new industrial and commercial
directions, and all were becoming more peaceably and quietly governed.
France, Germany, Holland and Scotland were alike troubled with
unemployed vagrants and unrelieved poor. The monastic houses and
hospitals under the old system certainly failed to cure the evil,
perhaps they only increased it. Municipal regulations and state laws
dealing with beggars and almsgiving therefore appear alike in France,
Germany, Scotland, and England, and at about the same time[671].

[671] Ashley, _Economic History_, Vol. II., p. 346 sqq.

In the sixteenth century the history of poor relief in Scotland and in
France is so like that of England as to suggest similar conditions or
possibly conscious imitation. In all three countries it is a history of
successive enactments in which the legal right of the poor to relief is
created, and in which more and more pressure is employed to obtain the
necessary funds.

[Sidenote: 6 _a_. History of legislation in Scotland before 1597.]

In Scotland as in England before 1535 there are a series of
vagabond acts[672], and in 1535 a statute was passed bearing a
strong resemblance to those passed in England under Henry VIII. The
punishments of whipping awarded to vagrants under the older Acts were
continued, and no beggar was to be allowed to beg in any parish except
that of his birth. New regulations were introduced with regard to funds
as in the contemporary English statute; the head men of each parish
were to "make takings" and to distribute to the beggars belonging to
the parish and to them only[673]. Thus, as in the England of 1536,
parochial responsibility was recognised, and the funds were to be
raised within the parish, but without compulsion.

[672] The statutes of 1425 (James I., c. 66) and of 1427 (James I.,
c. 103) are vagrant acts closely resembling those of England in the
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries.

[673] James V., cap. 22. Nicholl's _History of the Scotch Poor Law_, p.
12.

The next important change in Scotch legislation was made in 1574, and
the provisions then made were continued and amplified in 1579. In this
later statute the resemblance to the English Act of 1572 seems more
than accidental. Both the Scotch and the English statutes begin with
decreeing sharp punishments for vagrants, although those of the Scotch
law are the more severe. But the later clauses of both statutes deal
with relief, and in the Scottish enactment these are introduced almost
in the words of the English regulations, "And since charity would,
that the poor, aged and impotent persons should be as necessarilie
provided for, as the vagabonds and strong beggars repressed, and that
the aged and impotent poor people should have lodging and abyding
places throughout the realm to settle themselves into," it is ordained
that the provost and bailies in the towns and the justice in every
landward parish shall inquire into the names and condition of the
poor and impotent people born in the parish, or who have lived there
seven years, and shall make a register book containing their names and
surnames. And in order that every parish may know its own poor, all
poor people are ordered to return to the parish where they belonged
within eleven days. The provost and bailies and justices are then to
provide for the sustenance and lodging of those that must live by
alms; in order to meet the cost they are "to tax and stent the whole
inhabitants within the parish according to the estimation of their
substance, without exception of persons, to such weekly charge and
contribution as shall be thought expedient and sufficient to sustain
the said poor people." Overseers and collectors were to be chosen in
every town and parish, and any person who refused to contribute or
discouraged others from so doing was, if convicted, to remain in prison
until he obeyed the order of the parish. Badged beggars were allowed in
some parishes, prisoners were to be relieved and children were to be
apprenticed[674].

[674] James V., cap. 74. Nicholl's _History of the Scotch Poor Law_, p.
16 seq.

Compulsory taxation, parochial responsibility, the authority of
justices or municipal rulers, the appointment of overseers and the
provision made for the impotent poor and children are like those of
the English Act. But there is no regulation concerning the employment
of the able-bodied poor and the clauses concerning apprentices are far
more severe than those in the contemporary English statute[675].

[675] The child taken as an apprentice had to remain under the control
of his master or mistress for a much longer time than in England--the
boy until he was twenty-four and the girl until she was twenty-eight.

There are other vagabond Acts in 1592 and 1593, and the Act of 1592
ordains that the Act of 1579 shall be as well executed in all parts of
the realm as it has been in Edinburgh[676]. This seems to show that in
Scotland as in England the statutes of this time were badly executed,
but were not altogether a dead letter[677].

[676] James V., cap. 149. Nicholl's _History of the Scotch Poor Law_,
p. 27.

[677] The Act of 1579 was not generally well executed. At the
convention of Scottish boroughs held in Aberdeen July 1580,
representatives of certain towns were deputed to ask his Majesty to
take measures "for taking of ordour with euery parochyn to landwart for
sustening of thair awin pure people and impotent personis according
to the act maid in his Grace last Parliament quhilk hes bene as zit
neglected, without the quhilk unpossibill it is to the burrowis to tak
ordour thairanent, being oppressit with ane greit and infinit nomber of
strang and extraordinar beggeris nocht born nor bred within the saidis
burrowis." Marwick, _Convention of Scottish Boroughs_, I., p. 102. In
some towns however measures were taken. In Glasgow as early as 1575
badges were provided for the town beggars, and the rest were banished.
Marwick, _Extracts from the Records of the Borough of Glasgow_, I.,
p. 457. Occasionally also payments were made from the town chest to
particular poor people both before and after 1597. Thus the following
entries occur in the borough accounts:

Aug. 10, 1577. Item to Andro Duncane for his support to mend him of his
hurt, xiij_s._ iiij_d._

July 10, 1578. Item to Serjand Steill in almous to help to cure his
leg, xl_s._

Oct. 9th, 1584. Item gewin to Barbara Ramsaye ane pure wowman with mony
barnis in almous, xx_s._

1612. Item gifin to ane young man quha was rubbit of his pak, xl_s._

In 1597 also before the Act of that year was passed a committee had
been appointed in Glasgow "for reasoning anent the ordour and lawis
concerning the puir folkis." _Ib._, pp. 463, 467, 472, 477 and 187.

In Aberdeen in 1595 more organised relief was attempted. The whole town
on Jan. 23rd, 1595 met together and the poor were divided into four
classes, (1) "babis," (2) "decayit persones hous halderis," (3) "leamit
and impotent persones, (4) "sic as war decrepit and auld" if bred and
born in the town or resident there for seven years. The inhabitants
then agreed some to receive "ane baib" and others to contribute money.
They asked however that the magistrate should take "substantious ordour
anent the expelling of extranear beggaris" and that their own poor
should remain at home and be content with the aid allowed them, "and
according to the said voting ilk man speking be himself as said is,
the roll was instantlie sett down, and sic as everie man grantit be
his awin mouth wreittin, and the babis delyuerit to sic as war content
to receawe them." Extracts from the _Council Registers of Aberdeen_,
II., p. 124. The authorities of both Glasgow and Aberdeen we shall see
made other attempts to relieve their poor, but like the efforts of the
English towns these attempts were seldom long successful.

[Sidenote: 6 _b_. History of legislation in Scotland from 1597 to 1680.]

But in 1597 the next important change occurs. It begins by a clause
which approximates the poor relief system still more to that in force
in England. "Strong beggars and their bairns" are to "be employed in
common work during their life times." But it concludes with a clause
that separates the likeness hitherto existing between the regulations
of the two countries. The execution of the law in landward parishes is
placed in the hands of the kirk session[678].

[678] James V., cap. 272. Nicholl's _History of the Scotch Poor Law_,
pp. 31, 32.

Henceforward the history of poor relief in Scotland is different from
that of England. In England the law of 1597, as re-enacted in 1601,
remained the chief enactment for dealing with the poor throughout the
century, but in Scotland, on the contrary, many alterations in the
law were made; sometimes the kirk session was declared responsible
for relieving the poor, at other times the justices, sometimes the
heritors of the parish, were to assist the sessions, at other times the
presbytery; sometimes the impotent were to be better relieved, at other
times the able-bodied were to be employed in Houses of Correction[679]:
statute succeeded statute in the seventeenth century as in the
sixteenth, and for the most part with as little result.

[679] In 1600 the kirk Session was to be assisted when necessary by
one or two presbyters in the execution of the acts for the relief of
the poor and punishment of vagabonds, and all presbyters were to "take
diligent tryal of the obedience of the said sessions hereanent." _Ib._,
p. 34.

1617. Justices are appointed and are to execute laws against vagrants.
_Ib._, p. 37.

In 1661 justices of the peace were to administer the laws for the
relief of the poor. _Ib._, p. 58.

1672. Correction Houses to be established in thirty burghs. _Ib._, p.
67.

Proclamation of 1692. The heritors, ministers and         } This regulation was
elders were to make the lists of the poor, and the charge } confirmed by the Act
for the maintenance was to be borne half by the heritors  } of 1698. _Ib._, p. 79
and half by the householders of the parish.               } and 84.

Still, in spite of these many alterations, the Scotch poor law always
resembled that of England in insisting on the duty of each parish to
support three classes of people, (1) the aged poor, (2) the lame and
blind, &c., and (3) orphans and destitute children. But the able-bodied
poor of Scotland, unlike those of England, were not entitled to either
work or relief. No legal provision was made for them except in Houses
of Correction[680].

[680] _Ib._, p. 61.

[Sidenote: 7. Failure of administration in Scotland.]

But during the seventeenth century even the relief given to the old
and to the young in Scotland was not thoroughly administered. Not
only do the frequent enactments of the legislature show that the
governing class were not satisfied with the result of the existing
laws on the subject, but the fact that the Scotch poor laws were on
the whole ineffectual is also indicated by the response made by the
justices to the Scotch Privy Council, by the hardships which the poor
suffered in the time of dearth at the close of the century, and by the
continued existence of beggars, licensed or unlicensed, not only in the
seventeenth century but until the beginning of the present reign.

[Sidenote: 7 _a_. Responses of the Scotch justices to the Privy Council
in 1623 show that they were unable or unwilling to enforce the poor
laws themselves, and left it to the kirk sessions.]

In Scotland as in England the Privy Council endeavoured to induce
the justices to secure a better administration of the poor laws.
But the Scotch justices possessed less legal authority than their
English colleagues, while they also were less inclined either to obey
the Council or to impose taxation. Consequently the efforts of the
Scotch Privy Council failed while those of the English Privy Council
succeeded. The effect of the Council's interference in Scotland can be
seen in the events of the year 1623.

This was a time of great hardship. "Mony famileis and tennentis and
labouraris of the ground who formarlie wer honnest houshalderis ... ar
now turned beggaris thame selffis and of all siort of beggaris thair
estate and conditioun is most miserable, becaus thay for the most pairt
being eshamed to beg underlyis all the extremiteis quhairwith the
pinching of thair belleis may afflict thame[681]." In consequence of
this distress the Council issued an order that the destitute poor of
each parish should be adequately supported, and that constables should
be provided to apprehend and punish vagrants. The expense of both
proceedings was to be met by a tax levied upon all the inhabitants of
the district.

[681] _Register of the Scottish Privy Council_, Vol. XIII., p. XXIX.

The replies of the Scotch justices to this order bring out the
difference which existed between England and Scotland in law, opinions
and practice and the consequent difficulty in enforcing in Scotland a
thorough organisation of poor relief. Thus the justices of Haddington
and Lothian write that in regard to the tax which was ordered by the
Council for apprehending and keeping of idle beggars they "doutt if
ane simple proclamatioun be ane sufficient warrand unto us to sett
doun stent upoun every man"; with regard to the relief of the poor
they thought the general contribution beneficial, but "becaus every
contributioun is odious and smellis of ane taxatioun they could
not undertak how to proceid thairin, being ane matter beyond thair
capacitie[682]." The justices of Edinburgh reply that "thair is no
jaillis nor warding plaices within the parochins nor touns of this
sherefdome that is able to conteine a tent pairt of the pure beging
in the same," order was therefore given in Edinburgh that every
landed gentleman should sustain his own poor, and that the ministers
should exhort their parishioners to refrain from giving alms to the
able-bodied beggars[683]. Other justices arrange meetings to discuss
the best means of relieving the destitution which existed; they nearly
all report that it is best for the kirk sessions to "stent" their
own parishioners, and for each landlord to support the poor on his
estate[684].

[682] _Register of the Scottish Privy Council_, p. 836.

[683] _Ib._, p. 818.

[684] e.g. Linlithgow, _Ib._, p. 840. The justices of Perthshire
however said every poor person was to have a peck of meal weekly, and
that the heritors were to pay for it "conforme to the stent roll to be
sett doun be the sessioun of the paroche kirk." _Ib._, p. 820. See also
pp. 826, 832, &c.

Again in 1631 and 1632 there are signs of greater care for the poor
in Scotland, and this may be due to the action of the Council, but
in Scotland it seems clear that the justices left the administration
almost entirely in the hands of the kirk sessions, and that the kirk
sessions were not induced to enforce an adequate system of poor relief
for a long term of years. Consequently Scottish poor relief remained in
the seventeenth century in much the same condition as it had been in
both England and Scotland in the preceding period.

[Sidenote: 7 _b_. Inadequate relief given by the kirk sessions of
Banff.]

In Scotland, as in both countries before 1597, assistance was given
to the poor by the parochial officials, and the money was raised by
collections at the church doors.

How small these contributions were may be seen from the records of
the town and parish of Banff. In 1624 the condition of the poor at
Banff was discussed during the visitation of the presbytery, and the
"haill eldership promised to have ane faithfull cair for provisioune
of thair awne poore and to purge ther bounds of vagabond beggares."
No improved method of relief was reported at the next visitation, but
the "minister and eldares" again promise to look after the poor[685].
In 1631, however, some arrangement was actually made. No one was to
give alms to strange beggars, and the town poor were to be relieved in
their homes. But, in order to secure this result, provision was made
only for twenty poor, although the population of the town probably
numbered nearly two thousand[686]. It seems likely that this was about
the amount of assistance granted in Banff throughout the century, for
in 1673 it is noted that twenty-seven poor received assistance from
the kirk sessions, and in 1691 only twenty-five[687]. This relief was
so insufficient that beggars abounded; in 1633 £3 6_s._ 8_d._ was paid
"To Willie Wat, scurger for outhalding the poore[688]"; in 1642 vagrant
beggars were to be put in the "theiffis hoill" until the magistrates
had time to see them well scourged, while in 1698 and again in 1742 the
system of badged beggars was adopted[689], which is itself an admission
of the insufficiency of the relief afforded by the parish.

[685] _The Annals of Banff_, W. Cramond, II., pp. 23 and 25.

[686] _Ib._, I., p. 65. The population of the parish of Banff was 3000
in 1775, and in 1797 the town numbered 700 less than the parish. The
poor relieved in 1631 were possibly all town poor, but the figures of
1673 and 1691 refer to the whole parish.

[687] Extracts from the Kirk Sessions minutes, _Ib._, Vol. II., pp. 49
and 61. April 14th, 1673, "Distributed poor's money: May 5, £12. 2_s._
4_d._; Aug. 5, £12. 0_s._ 4_d._; Nov. 2, £13. 0_s._ 4_d._; Feb. 2, £13.
12_s._ Ten are Seatown poor and seventeen are town poor." "Nov. 17th,
1691, Distributed to the poor £10. 16_s._ Number of poor: 8 town's
poor, 4 Seatown poor, 6 landwart poor and 5 protemporarious."

[688] _Ib._, I., pp. 74, 86.

[689] _Ib._, pp. 168 and 213. 1698, May 21. "The magistrats and
Counsell appoynt bages for such poor as is thought convenient to
beg through the towne and ordain the drum to goe thorrow the towne
inhibiting to relive any poor except those who have badges."

[Sidenote: 7 _c_. The relief of the poor in Aberdeen.]

Occasionally also, as in Elizabethan England, the burgesses of
particular towns saw that the poor could not live on the relief granted
by the church officials, and made great efforts to raise additional
funds so that they might be able to free their town from beggars. But,
as the convention of Scotch boroughs stated in 1579, it was difficult
to grant relief in one town only, because there were so many beggars
from other parts. In Scotland, as in England under Elizabeth, the town
systems of poor relief ceased to be successful after a few years. The
efforts in this direction made in Aberdeen are probably fairly typical
of those attempted by more philanthropic burgesses. Even in 1595 the
inhabitants of Aberdeen had distributed the destitute "babis" and had
levied voluntary contributions for the other poor[690]. Early in the
seventeenth century, however, beggars existed who were licensed by the
town[691], and in 1619 the "haill towne" was again convened, and it
was agreed that all the beggars should be sustained in their homes and
prevented from begging. It was estimated that the cost would amount to
2,600 marks, and £1,000 of this was to be raised "by way of taxatioun,"
while eleven hundred marks was to be obtained from the contributions
at communion or collections at the church doors[692]. Two years later,
in April 1621, we are told that "the wark hes hed a gude and happie
succes so that the haill poor peopill within this burght that were then
beggaris have beine now almost these thrie yeiris past interteained
and keiped from begging." It was therefore then agreed that the same
methods should "stand and continew" always, and that the town should
continue to contribute its thousand pounds a year, that the poor might
be relieved at home[693]. Why the plan failed does not appear, but
it did fail, since in 1650 tickets were given to the town beggars of
Aberdeen to distinguish them from those of other districts[694].

[690] See note above.

[691] _Selections from Ecclesiastical Records of Aberdeen_, p. 83.

[692] _Extracts from the Records of the Burgh of Aberdeen_, I. p. 360.

[693] _Ib._, p. 372. The distribution of relief was apparently still
arranged by deacons appointed by the kirk sessions.

[694] _Ib._, p. 112, Vol. II. _Scottish Burgh Records Society_.

In Aberdeen, therefore, we can see that the money raised by the
kirk sessions was only about half the amount which the town rulers
considered necessary for the adequate support of the poor, and that
when the town was kept free from beggars resort had to be made to a
compulsory tax.

[Sidenote: 7 _d_. Infrequency of assessment in Scotland before 1818.]

But compulsory taxes were very unpopular both in Scotland and England,
but while in England they were forced on the people by the justices
of the peace, acting under instructions from the Privy Council, in
Scotland they never were generally adopted until the present century.
In the report of 1818 the temporary arrangements of Aberdeen and other
towns[695] were forgotten, and it was then said that before 1700 only
three parishes had resorted to compulsion[696]. This means that only
three parishes continued to use assessments for a long period, and
therefore the poor relief granted in Scotland was almost always the
voluntary assistance given by the kirk sessions.

[695] For Glasgow see note below; for Dumbarton see _Dumbarton Burgh
Records_, p. 49. 18th Jan. 1636, "Forsameikill as the magistrattis,
minister and elders of this burgh c^ovenit in this sessioun in the
kirk of this burgh, on the 14 of this instant In respect the burgh is
trublit be straingers and vnkuth beggars and the pure of this burgh
damnifeit, Thairfor thay thocht it best that the magistrattis sould
caus put the Acts of Parliament againe abill and sturdie beggars to
executioun q^rby unkuth pure resort to thair own parochins and the
pure of this burgh and paroche be helpit and bettir maintenit, and to
this effect that the magistrattis sould caus set down ane stent roll
vpoune the inhabitants and burgesses of this burgh for a monthlie
c^otributioun to the poore, to keip them fra begging. [Stentmasters
chosin]."

[696] Report forwarded by the Moderator of the General Assembly and
printed in the 3rd Rep. of the Select Committee of the House of Commons
on the Poor Laws.

[Sidenote: 7 _e_. Insufficiency of relief granted during the years
1692-1699.]

How insufficient this assistance was is indicated by the proclamations
issued during the years of scarcity at the close of the century. The
period from 1692 to 1699 has been called the "seven ill years." The
poor suffered great distress, and a series of proclamations was issued
by the Privy Council with the object of remedying matters.

In 1692 the first proclamation was published; this stated that the
Act for Houses of Correction had been neglected, and ordered the
heritors and inhabitants of each parish to meet and put in execution
the other good laws made for the poor[697]. In the same year a second
proclamation was issued which stated that the previous order had
had little effect because it was uncertain where the beggars were
born and because suitable provision was not made for them in their
parishes[698]. The next year therefore another proclamation was
promulgated, and, it is said, "due obedience" was not yet given to the
laws, "so that the poor are not duly provided for in many places nor
the vagabonds restrained." In 1698 the fourth and last proclamation was
published, and again it is stated that the poor laws have not taken
effect, partly because there were no houses provided for the poor and
partly because the people responsible for the execution of the laws had
been negligent of their duty[699].

[697] Nicholls, _Hist. of the Scotch Poor Law_, p. 78 seq.

[698] _Ib._, p. 81.

[699] _Ib._, p. 83.

The statements of these proclamations show that little poor relief was
then administered in Scotland, but a stronger proof that this was so
is furnished by the existence of the misery endured by the poor during
these years: this was so great that it is said whole parishes in some
districts were nearly depopulated[700].

[700] _Ib._, p. 78.

[Sidenote: 7 _f_. Insufficiency of relief indicated by prevalence of
beggary.]

But the fact which throws the strongest light upon the administration
of poor relief in Scotland is the continued existence of beggary. This
was the real method by which most of the poor were relieved. Even the
Town Council of Aberdeen tolerated licensed beggars, and in 1664 a
resolution was passed by the synod, which shows that the licensing of
beggars was then a general practice in the diocese; it is ordained that
a minister should license "those creaving for support" only within his
own parish[701].

[701] Selections from ecclesiastical records of Aberdeen. _Register of
Synod_, p. 276.

In 1699 the beggars of Stirling also were licensed[702], but the
existence of licensed beggars was not the worst of the evil. This
method of dealing with the matter, it is true, is very strong evidence
that insufficient poor relief was given because it is furnished by the
administrators themselves; the beggar must be destitute, or they ought
not to have given him a license, and he could hardly have been among
those who were too proud to receive relief. But the districts where
unlicensed beggary prevailed were in a far worse condition. How great
the evil was may be seen from the evidence of Fletcher of Saltoun, who
wrote in 1698. His complaints and even his language closely resemble
that of Harman when he describes the English beggars under Henry VIII.,
and that of Hext, concerning those who lived under Elizabeth; they
are in strong contrast to the self-satisfied reports of the English
justices of the reign of Charles I. "There are," he says, "at this day
in Scotland (besides a great number of families very meanly provided
for by the church boxes, with others, who, living upon bad food, fall
into various diseases) 200,000 people begging from door to door. These
are not only no ways advantageous, but a very grievous burden to so
poor a country, and though the number of them be perhaps double to what
it was formerly, by reason of the present great distress, yet in all
times there have been about 100,000 of these vagabonds who have lived
without any regard or submission either to the laws of the land or even
of those of God and nature.... No magistrate could ever discover or be
informed which way any of these wretches died, or that ever they were
baptized. Many murders have been discovered among them; and they are
not only a most unspeakable oppression to poor tenants (who, if they
give not bread or some sort of provision to perhaps forty such villains
in one day, are sure to be insulted by them), but they rob many poor
people, who live in houses distant from any neighbourhood. In years of
plenty many thousands of them meet together in the mountains, where
they feast and riot for many days; and at country weddings, markets,
burials and other like public occasions, they are to be seen, both
men and women, perpetually drunk, cursing, blaspheming and fighting
together[703]."

[702] 20 May, 1699. "Considering the insuportable number of extraneous
and vagrant beggers who daylie frequent this burgh" the elders and
baillies are to meet "and take ane exact account of the poor belonging
to the samen burgh and order badges for them soe as they may be knoune
and distinguished from extraneous beggers." _Extracts from the Records
of Stirling_, Vol. II., p. 90.

[703] Second Discourse concerning the affairs of Scotland quoted and
compared with Hext's letter in Dunlop's _Law of Scotland relating to
the Poor_, p. 1.

This terrible state of things indicates clearly that no efficient
system of poor relief was then in force in Scotland, and shows the
evil resulting from trusting the relief of the poor to charity, when
charity was altogether insufficient. It is, however, well known that
in more charitable days the Scotch system of poor relief found many
supporters who urged that the poor obtained sufficient help, and that
the organisation which relied on charity called forth a much more noble
spirit in both rich and poor than that which depended upon compulsion.
This opinion prevailed especially in 1818, although even then beggary
was nearly universal[704] in Scotland, but it must be remembered that
in 1818 Scottish poor relief gained by comparison with the English
because England was then suffering from the increase in pauperism
produced by the lax rules of administration which had been introduced
into her system of poor relief during the preceding twenty-five years.

[704] See 3rd _Report of Select Committee on the Poor Laws_.

[Sidenote: 7 _g_. Reasons for the failure of the administration in
Scotland.]

But in the seventeenth century the danger was rather that there should
be too little relief than too much. The citizens of Glasgow, like
those of Aberdeen, introduced compulsory assessments, and said the
"commendable cair" for the poor now shown was "to the glorie of God
and good report of this citie"; but, in spite of this good result,
altered their methods, apparently because of the unpopularity of the
poor rate[705]. It is easy to see why this happened. Town governors
and kirk officials were much more affected by unpopularity with the
ratepayers than justices of the peace, and were much less influenced by
the central government. Consequently it seems that because in Scotland
the system of poor relief was not in the hands of the justices of
the peace, there was no period in the history of Scotch poor relief
corresponding to the years in which the Book of Orders was enforced in
England under Charles I. The result was that in Scotland the poor laws
though made were not thoroughly administered until the present reign.

[705] In 1638 the Glasgow Town Council reports in favour of relieving
the poor in their homes, and orders the inhabitants to be "stented" for
their relief. In Jan. 1639 the rate was imposed and amounted to £600,
or one-fifth of the ordinary taxation. In April the poor were to be
"keipit in thair houssis for ane quarter to cum," and in October the
arrangement was said to be successful, and was continued for a year.
But in 1647 the town authorities say they are loath to take the course
allowed by law, and ask the kirk session to "fallow furthe the way
on ane voluntar monethlie contributione"; any deficiency in the sum
necessary for the poor was however still to be contributed by the town.
In 1649 means were formed of stimulating the voluntary contributors
"Anent the inbringing of the poores mentinance it is inacted that the
refuissars be quarterit vpon with sojouries." Still the funds raised
were insufficient, and in 1653 a tax was again imposed only to be again
discontinued a few years later. _Extracts from the Records of Glasgow_,
R. Marwick, Vol. I., pp. 395, 396, 400, 406, and Vol. II., pp. 180,
182, 254, 369.

[Sidenote: 8. The history of poor relief in France.]

The history of poor relief in France is very similar to that in
Scotland, except that in the earlier stages French legislation is in
advance of that of England.

After the middle of the fourteenth century there were vagrant laws in
France and Paris as in Scotland and England. The first general measure
for the relief of the poor also is almost exactly contemporaneous
in all three countries. In 1536, Francis I. issued two edicts. The
first ordains "that the impotent poor who have room and lodging and
dwelling houses shall be nourished and entertained by their parishes,
and for this purpose a register shall be made by the curés, vicars or
churchwardens, each for his own parish," in order that these officers
may distribute alms to the poor who are disabled. In each parish boxes
were to be placed in which offerings were to be collected, and every
Sunday, in Paris as in England, the preachers in their sermons were
to exhort their hearers to contribute. Abbeys, priories, chapters and
colleges were to give their alms to this box[706].

[706] Alexandre Monnier, _Histoire de l'assistance dans les temps
anciens et modernes_, p. 307.

"Par chacune paroisse, seront establis boëtes et troncs qui par chacun
jour de dimanche, seront recommandés par les curez et vicaires en leur
prosnes et par les prédicateurs en leur sermons."

By a second edict of King Francis, issued in this year, the able-bodied
poor were compelled to labour in return for their alms, and it was
ordered that the ordinances made in Paris concerning the poor should
be binding also in the towns of Brittany[707]. These edicts of King
Francis contain almost exactly similar provisions to those of the
statutes of Henry VIII., even in matters of detail.

[707] Monnier, p. 308. Brittany was not thoroughly incorporated with
the rest of France.

Several other edicts between this and 1551 concern the poor, chiefly
the Parisian poor. Public works were established to employ them, and
efforts were made to succour the impotent poor in hospitals. In 1544
a governing body for the poor was established by Letters Patent,
and the right of levying a tax or poor rate was given to this new
authority[708]. But the new taxation met with much opposition, and
in 1551 an ordinance was issued which bears a very close resemblance
to the English statute of 1563. All the inhabitants of Paris and the
suburbs were to state how much they were willing to contribute to
the support of the poor. Their answers were to be laid before the
Parliament, which was then to assess everyone according to his wealth.
The object of the edict was to make the taxation voluntary if possible
without surrendering the right of imposing compulsory payment. Even
at the Revolution this contribution had not altogether disappeared,
although it was too small an amount to have much[709] practical effect.

[708] _Ib._, p. 313 seq.

[709] _Ib._, pp. 314 and 317.

In 1566 it was again ordered that throughout France every town and
every village was to care for its own poor[710]. In particular towns
a good deal was done: not only were public workshops opened in
Paris[711], but in 1612 new hospitals were established, and in Lyons
and in certain other towns the same kind of relief was given.

[710] C. Chamborant, _Du Paupérisme_, p. 92.

[711] _Ib._, p. 95.

But, as in England in the sixteenth century, relief was only
administered in particular districts and for a short time. In France
as in Scotland the history of the seventeenth century was like that
of the sixteenth. Edict succeeded edict; they had some result but not
much; no general system was ever established, nor were the poor ever
effectually relieved. Perhaps it was impossible that laws of this kind
should be executed in France because the French did not possess any
county officials like the English justices of the peace. The Council
might be willing to enforce the law, but the necessary machinery was
wanting, and consequently in France as in Scotland poor laws were only
made; they were not thoroughly administered.

[Sidenote: 9. Comparison between history of poor relief in England and
that in France and Scotland.]

The history of poor relief in France and Scotland thus seems to bring
into greater prominence the fact that the English organisation is not
exactly the inevitable result of the statute of 1601. Like causes led
to like regulations in all three countries, but the regulations did not
lead to the same result. The organisation of poor relief in France and
Scotland continued in the English sixteenth century stage down to the
present century. In the light of their history we can understand the
preamble to the commission of 1631. The justices acted in many parts as
if the poor laws were obsolete, and they were always tending to become
obsolete in France and Scotland. In England that stage was passed
during the ten years of the enforcement of the Book of Orders. Privy
Council and justices were alike effective at the same time; the Privy
Council took action, and the justices were urged to do their duty.
Few officials, perhaps none, could have done the work so well. If the
justices of later days granted too much relief it was because of the
justices of Charles I. that relief was ever efficiently administered at
all.




CHAPTER XIV.

CONCLUSIONS.

  1. Summary of history of English poor relief before the Civil War.
  2. The political significance of the paternal measures of the
Government.
    (a) Possible attempt to attach to the Government the poorer part of the nation.
    (b) Habitual use of proclamations and orders in Council for a popular purpose.
  3. Success of the enforcement of the Book of Orders in the reign of
Charles I.
  4. Results of effectual administration of the poor law on English
social history.
    (a) The increased communication between rich and poor.
    (b) Decrease of bitterness of competition and increase of order.


[Sidenote: 1. Summary of history of English system of poor relief
before the Civil War.]

We have now traced the history of the making and early administration
of the English Poor Law. We have seen that the English system of poor
relief like the English House of Commons was once only one of many
like institutions common to the whole of Western Europe. Although in
our century other nations have again regulated the help given to the
poor by public authorities, in neither France, Scotland nor Germany has
the public organisation for the relief of the destitute a continuous
history. The system survived in England alone among the greater
nations of Europe. It began as part of the labour statutes, but the
regulations of Richard II. had probably little practical effect. The
administration of relief of the poor by secular authorities seems to
have been first really organised under Henry VIII. by London, Ipswich,
and other towns. Even after this public poor relief was not thoroughly
established for more than another century.

These municipal orders were followed by statutes adopting similar
regulations for the whole country. But the statutes were very
irregularly enforced; they were constantly neglected, and new
legislation was passed with little better result. Still the great
distress of the years of scarcity of 1594 to 1597 excited public
attention; men like Bacon and Raleigh joined in the discussions of
Parliament and in 1597 the statutory provisions were made which
remained for the most part unchanged until 1834. But the law was
only well executed for a few years: good administration rather than
good legislation was necessary, and it is in regard to the provision
for administration rather than in regard to municipal regulations or
statutory enactments that the history of England differs from that of
France and Scotland.

The difference was mainly caused by the coexistence in England of a
Privy Council active in matters concerning the poor and of a powerful
body of county and municipal officers who were willing to obey the
Privy Council.

Even in the reign of Elizabeth the Privy Council sometimes interfered
in enforcing measures of relief, but only as a temporary expedient
for relieving the distress caused by years of scarcity. But from 1629
to 1640 they acted continuously in this direction and by means of the
Book of Orders succeeded, as far as children and the impotent poor were
concerned, in securing the due execution of the law.

The Council also succeeded in inducing the justices to provide work for
the able-bodied poor in many of the districts in the eastern counties,
and in some places in almost every county.

This provision of work was provided either in Houses of Correction or
in the parishes. In the former case it was punitive, in the latter it
was given mainly with the object of enabling the unemployed to earn
their living; in both cases it was often accompanied by training in
a trade. It does not seem to have been designed at all as a test for
the applicant for relief. The poor of the parishes were probably well
known; the strange poor were all supposed to be sent indiscriminately
to the House of Correction; moreover no other form of relief was
granted to the able-bodied poor except when the parishes failed to find
sufficient work.

The organisation was needed because it was an age of economic
transition; the agricultural revolution prevented men from finding work
in their old employments, while under the new industrial organisation
earnings were more unstable even when they were higher than they were
before.

[Sidenote: 2. The political side of this paternal government.]

[Sidenote: 2 _a_. Possible attempt to secure the adhesion of poorer
classes to government.]

It may be that there is a political side to the policy of Charles's
Council in this matter. Dr Gardiner suggests that the adoption of
this policy of paternal government may be attributed to the influence
of Wentworth. "It can hardly be by accident that his accession to
the Privy Council was followed by a series of measures aiming at
the benefit of the people in general, and at the protection of the
helpless against the pressure caused by the self interest of particular
classes[712]."

[712] S. R. Gardiner, _History of England_, VII., p. 160, ed. 1884.

There were also other members of the Council who were likely to be
interested in enforcing orders for the benefit of the poorer classes.
Sir Julius Caesar, the Master of the Rolls, was at that time in office.
He certainly was very charitable if not very wise in his charity. He is
described by Fuller as "a person of prodigious bounty to all of worth
or want so that he might seem to be Almoner-General of the Nation.
The story is well known of a Gentleman who once borrowing his Coach
(which was as well known to poor people as any Hospital in England)
was so rendevouzed about with Beggers in London that it cost him all
the money in his purse to satisfie their importunity; so that he might
have hired twenty coaches on the same terms[713]." It is also probable
that Laud may have had something to do with the strict enforcement
of the apprentice part of the law in 1633-4, for we have seen he was
much interested in apprenticeship, and founded many charities for the
purpose himself.

[713] Fuller's _Worthies_, p. 179.

Dr Gardiner also thinks that this policy "may serve as an indication
that there were some at least in the Council who in their quarrel with
the aristocracy were anxious to fall back upon an alliance with the
people[714]." It is very possibly not entirely accidental that the name
of John Caesar is attached to a report from Edwinstree in 1639 in which
the inhabitants are "well disposed in relegion, obedient to gou(ern)m^t
and forward in pious and charitable accons[715]," while the district
of John Hampden sent up at least one protest as to the measures of
scarcity[716].

[714] S. R. Gardiner, _Hist. of England_, VII., p. 164.

[715] Vol. 426, 73.

[716] See above, p. 193.

[Sidenote: 2 _b_. The use of proclamations and orders in Council for a
popular purpose.]

There is however possibly another political side to these orders.
The measures which were designed to protect the poor from the undue
rapacity of traders or from the carelessness of parochial officials
were nearly all enforced by proclamations and orders in Council.
Generally these orders were in accordance with the letter of the law
and almost always with the spirit which had dictated the legislation;
but still the fact that proclamations and orders in Council were used
to enforce this popular side of government may have been designed to
increase the popularity of government by this means; it certainly
tended to habituate the justices to their use and to make the majority
of the nation cease to regard them as instruments of tyranny.

This danger was not unforeseen at the time. A knowledge of it probably
influenced the reply of the Scotch justices when they doubted if "ane
simple proclamatioun be ane sufficient warrand" for levying a tax[717],
but there is also a remarkable protest by John Hawarde in 1597 when he
is recording the enforcement of the measures undertaken to help the
poor at that time. He says that engrossers, and forestallers of corn
in London were proceeded against "by the Queen's prerogative only and
by proclamation, councils, orders and letters, and thus their decrees,
councils, proclamations, and orders shall be a firm and forcible law
and of the like force as the Common law or an Act of Parliament." The
Puritan lawyer jealously notes that the builders of illegal cottages
and negligent justices also were to be punished "on the proclamation
and not on the statute[718]." "And this is the intent," he says,
"of the Privy Councillors in our day and time to attribute to their
councils and orders the vigour, force and power of a firm law and
of higher virtue and force, jurisdiction and preheminence' than any
positive law, whether it be the common law or statute law. And thus
in a short time the Privy Councillors of this realm would be the most
honourable, noble and commanding lords in all the world and [have]
the majesty of prince and ruler of the greatest reverence in all the
world[719]."

[717] See above, p. 283.

[718] New houses in London had to be of a certain size and height,
and in the country had to have land attached to them. During the same
setting of this Court the Attorney-General informed against a certain
Negroose and others for building cottages in London "contrary to the
proclamation." One offender was fined £100, another £40, and another
£20, while the houses were destroyed "for their base condition" and the
timber was to be sold for the benefit of the poor. _Les Reportes del
Cases in Camera Stellata_, 1593-1609. John Hawarde, edited by W. P.
Baildon, F.S.A.

[719] _Ib._, pp. 78, 79.

It is quite possible that this side of government was enforced by the
orders in Council simply as a matter of convenience; it might have
been difficult to pass new legislation contrary to the interests of
the middle classes through a body in which the representation of those
classes was so great as it was in the Tudor and Stuart House of Commons.

But if the danger of allowing the royal prerogative to be used apart
from statute law was seen and protested against under the popular Queen
Elizabeth, it would certainly also excite opposition in the reign of
Charles I.

The substance of the orders however does not appear to have excited
opposition. Men of both sides sent in their reports to the Privy
Council, and more energetic measures to execute the poor law were taken
in the Puritan counties of the east than in any other part of England.

[Sidenote: 3. Effect of the enforcement of the Book of Orders in the
reign of Charles I.]

The effects of the enforcement of the Elizabethan poor law and of
the Book of Orders were considerable both in the reign of Charles I.
and ever since that time. Harman's book, the many insurrections and
riots of the sixteenth century, the letter of Justice Hext and the
statements in many proclamations show us how great was the disorder in
England during the reigns of the Tudors and James I. The Somersetshire
justice almost unconsciously reveals the main part of the reason. Many
people, he tells us, were emboldened to say, "They must not starve,
They will not starve," and so the honest countryman suffered from
the depredations of rogues and could hardly endure the burdens laid
upon him[720]. "Maximus magister venter" quotes another writer of the
period; repression did little good until it was accompanied by relief.
Moreover it was impossible to enforce the repressive regulations
against vagrants until relief was administered because the "foolish
pity" of the inhabitants and of the justices prevented punishments
from being inflicted. Throughout the sixteenth century and, after a
short interval after 1597, again in the reign of James I. there are
complaints of the increase of vagrants and of the disorder in the
country[721].

[720] Strype's _Annals_, No. 213. See p. 126.

[721] E.g. _Little Proc. Bk._, James I., No. 27.

The effect of the Book of Orders cannot be lightly estimated if we
contrast the statements of Justice Hext and his contemporaries with
those of the justices under Charles I. Complaints of great disorder
then cease in all parts of the country except London. In many places
vagabonds are said to no longer trouble the neighbourhood. In High
Peak the justices state "nowe wee haue fewe or noe wanderers[722]"; at
Wallington in Surrey few vagabonds are taken because now only a small
number come to the hundred[723]; while at Andover there is "scarce a
vagrant found about vs nor are any pickeryes com(m)itted[724]." In
a few places, as at Bramber[725], the improvement is stated to be
owing to the activity of Provost Marshals but in many other places
it is directly connected with the Book of Orders. Thus in parts of
Westmoreland we hear that there was great improvement in consequence
of the enforcement of the poor law in 1638; "idle persons haue beene
banished out of the countrey" and the poor of the neighbourhood were
"more willing to take paynes[726]." In two divisions of Shropshire it
was "rare to see a wandring person[727]," and at Appletree in Derby
the overseers relieve the poor and set to work "such as are poore
and yett well able to worke w^{ch} wee fynde doeth very much good in
the cuntrye[728]." But the most decided symptoms of improvement are
indicated by a report from a district of Leicestershire which reveals
a state of things in strong contrast to that of Somerset in 1596.
The justices record a very careful attention to the Book of Orders,
especially the parts relating to setting the poor to work, teaching
knitting to the young and placing out apprentices "that yong people
and children may receive imployment and fittinge educacon and soe
avoide idlenes and lewdenes of life." These efforts they tell us "in
all partes of the cou(n)tie hath already wrought soe good effect; as
that since the last Assizes to the day of the date hereof there is come
into the comon gaole in the cou(n)ty of Leic. but two prisoners for
two small felonyes, committed by two seu(er)all yonge people, beinge
servants settled at the tyme of the offences committed[729]."

[722] _Dom. State Papers_, Chas. I., Vol. 293, No. 115, July, 1635.

[723] _Ib._, Vol. 315, No. 25, March 1635/6.

[724] _Ib._, Vol. 250, 11, II., Nov. 1633.

[725] _Ib._, Vol. 426, 37 and 19, July, 1639.

[726] _Dom. State Papers_, Chas. I., Vol. 388, No. 7, April, 1638.

[727] Cherbury and Ford, Chas. I., Vol. 272, 53, 54, July, 1634. See
above for a like report from Monslow, also where the effect of the
enforcement of the Book of Orders was immediate.

[728] Vol. 185, 41, Feb. 1630/1. From Morleston and Litchurch,
Derbyshire, also the justices say of vagrants "our country is cleerly
deliuered of them." Vol. 194, No. 25, June, 1631.

[729] Vol. 216, No. 103, May 30th, 1632. From several divisions of
Somerset also we have a report which shows that the country was
becoming quiet, though the good order is often attributed to the
watches for vagrants. "Watches and warde have beene and are continued
whereby the number of vagabonds are much diminished and this country
thereby well freed." Vol. 289, No. 20. Also from the wapentakes of
Stancliff and Ewecross, co. York, we hear there are "verie fewe or none
to bee founde wanderinge or rogeinge." Vol. 364, No. 49. Although in
these cases the improvement is attributed to punishment rather than
relief, it probably indicates that relief also was well administered
since neither justices nor inhabitants could or would prevent
vagabondage by punishment unless it were accompanied by efficient poor
relief.

The disappearance of vagrants, the decrease of felonies and increase of
order are reported as the direct consequence of the administration of
the Book of Orders. Other causes may have contributed to this result,
but the reports of the justices from so many places in different parts
of the country are conclusive evidence that efficient relief of the
poor hastened the time when the peaceable citizen and peasant could
work and live in security and quietness.

This great belief in the good results of the work and of the relief
afforded is very characteristic of the administrators of the time.
If the system of the seventeenth century had many disadvantages when
concerned with the more capable members of the community, its dealings
with the poor compare very favourably with the methods possible in a
freer community. The modern philanthropist may talk about being an
individualist but he cannot be one. He cannot punish the idler and
the drunkard as such directly and so it is rarely possible for him to
aid the innocent members of a family without encouraging the guilty.
Consequently he cannot deal with individuals on their merits, he can
only deal with families. But in the seventeenth century the drunkard
was either fined or placed in the stocks, and the idler was sent to the
House of Correction. You might then help the rest of his family to find
employment or have the young children taught in knitting schools and
apprenticed without dangerously weakening the incentives to industry
and sobriety. The direct punishment had a good effect in dealing with
people for whom the community made itself responsible. It sacrificed
only the individuality of the offender and not that of all his family.
Consequently there was little danger in the increase of organised
relief and it seems to have produced good results. The comments when
we hear them are all in a satisfied tone. The Norwich magistrates were
delighted with their organisation after seven years' trial and this in
the reign of Elizabeth when the complaints were great in most parts of
the country where little relief was given.

The stocks for the poor might be expected to operate unfavourably on
the wages of unskilled labour; but there is no trace of their having
done so. Wages rose during the Commonwealth it is true, but they rose
also during the reigns of the earlier Stuarts and continued to rise
until near the end of the century. This rise in wages seems to have
been increased rather than checked by the enforcement of the Book of
Orders, probably because the casual labourer had a far more depressing
effect on the labour market when he wandered everywhere than when he
was regularly employed by the stock of his parish. Moreover if the
system affected wages at all, it would affect the unskilled labourer
rather than the skilled. But after the Civil War the unskilled labourer
gains relatively less: it is the more skilled forms of labour that are
better paid[730]. It thus seems fairly certain that the stocks for
setting the poor to work did not unfavourably influence the wages of
the lower class of labourers.

[730] Between 1600 and 1688 wages rise continuously in every decade.
If we take the decennial averages of labour given by Prof. Rogers we
find that between the accession of James I. and 1688 in most cases the
greatest increase of wages was during the period from 1643 to 1652. But
this increase may be largely owing to the disturbances of the Civil
War, since from 1663 to 1672 the rate of increase is less than that
of any preceding ten years of the century. With the exception of the
decade of the Civil War the greatest rise in wages occurs during the
ten years immediately preceding, from 1633 to 1642, that is during
the time when the organisation established by the Book of Orders was
established. Moreover the increase is the more remarkable when we
compare the rates of wages with the price of corn. For from 1633-1642
the average price of wheat per quarter was 41_s._ 2_d._, while from
1643-1652 it was 48_s._ 11_d._, and during the next ten years 47_s._
2¼_d._ _Hist. of Agric. and Prices_, Vol. V., p. 276. The average
price of wheat was therefore considerably lower during the decade
before the War. The following are the decennial averages of the worst
paid labour given by Prof. Rogers, _Hist. of Agric. and Prices_, Vol.
V., p. 672:

  +-----------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+
  |           |             |             |  Digging,   |             |               |
  |           |  Tiler or   | Bricklayer  | Labourer to | Hedging, or |    Women's    |
  |           |   Slater    |  and Man    |   Artisan   |  Ditching   | ordinary work |
  |           |  per week   |  per week   |  per week   |  per week   |   per week    |
  +-----------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+
  |           | _s._ _d._   | _s._ _d._   | _s._ _d._   | _s._ _d._   |   _s._ _d._   |
  | 1603-1612 |  6    0     | 10    9½ |  4    0     |  4   10½ |    2    6     |
  +-----------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+
  | 1613-1622 |  6    2¾ | 10    2¾ |  4    0¼ |  4   10¾ |    1   11     |
  +-----------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+
  | 1623-1632 |  6    8     | 11    0     |  4    4¼ |  4    9     |    2    1½ |
  +-----------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+
  | 1633-1642 |  7    6     | 11    8¾ |  5    0     |  5    6½ |    3    0     |
  +-----------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+
  | 1643-1652 |  9    5½ | 14    1¾ |  5   10½ |  5    9½ |    2    6     |
  +-----------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+
  | 1653-1662 | 11    1     | 17    7     |  6    0     |  6    0     |    2    6     |
  +-----------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+
  | 1663-1672 |  9   11¼ | 13    0     |  6    1¼ |  6    1¾ |    3    0     |
  +-----------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+

It will be seen that wages rose slowly before 1632, and then began to
rise at a much more rapid rate, and that the wages of unskilled labour
rose almost as much during the decade 1633 to 1642 as during the ten
years in which the war was conducted.

The setting of the poor to work in this period cannot be judged as
if it were part of the system of free competition of modern England.
There was little notion of free competition; state and town interfered
in wages and in the management of industry; everyone was subject to
restrictions in the supposed interests of the nation, and the stocks
for the poor were almost a necessary complement of this national
organisation of industry. The idea of the time was to maintain a
stable condition of affairs; the attempt to find employment for the
poor in their slack times corresponded to the measures taken to lower
prices in the years of bad harvests and to secure the interests of the
employers when labourers were scarce and wages rising. Whatever effect
these attempts may have had on industry as a whole they certainly
lessened the immediate sufferings of the unemployed during this time
of transition and they must be taken into account in any attempt to
estimate the condition of the poor at the period.

So far as the temporary difficulties of the seventeenth century were
concerned therefore, the system established by the Book of Orders
lessened the misery of the poor and contributed to the establishment of
order.

But the whole of the poor law did not disappear during the Civil War.
It is true that the existing schemes for the employment of the poor
were discontinued but the relief of the impotent and the care of
children have continued down to our own time.

[Sidenote: 4. Results of poor relief in later times.]

We have been so accustomed to hear of the evils of the law of
settlement and the abuses of the relief granted in aid of wages, that
we perhaps fail to consider the better effects of the existence of a
system of poor relief.

[Sidenote: 4 _a_. The increased union of rich and poor.]

In the first place the method of administration has helped to unite
the different classes of the nation together. The rich may have known
little about the poor but the country gentlemen as justices have been
obliged to know something. Besides every ratepayer has suffered when
any cause has permanently depressed the labouring class. All have
to pay more poor rates and so are led to discuss, and if possible
to remedy, abuses and grievances. In this way the evils of bad
administration of relief have been checked and interest in all matters
affecting the poor has been stimulated.

But the existence of the poor law may have had even more important
effects.

[Sidenote: 4 _b_. Decrease of bitterness in competition and increase of
order.]

Many are affected by the poor law who never receive relief; it takes
away some of the horror of failure from all who may if unfortunate need
help of the kind and so renders the struggle for existence less brutal
to the whole of the labouring class.

In the seventeenth century this assistance to the poor helped to make
England a peaceful community and it has probably had the same effect
ever since.

The earlier centuries of our history were not distinguished by the
quiet and orderly habits of the people. Whenever, as in the reigns of
Henry III. and Richard II., we had little war abroad there was disorder
at home. In the sixteenth century we have seen every season of scarcity
produce riots, insurrections or rebellion. In 1529 Norfolk and Kent
were in insurrection, in 1586 Gloucestershire was discontented, in 1596
the peasants of Oxfordshire took up arms; while in 1549 the economic
distress was mainly responsible for the rebellion which caused the
fall of the Duke of Somerset and nearly produced a revolution. Even
in ordinary times property was not safe; bands of vagrants roamed the
country who compelled the inhabitants to grant them relief; petty
thefts were committed and were neither detected nor punished, sometimes
robbery even was successfully attempted in open daylight and was
unrepressed. In Scotland a like state of things lasted at least as late
as the end of the seventeenth century and indeed much later still.
Louise Michelle on her visit to England was more struck by English
poor relief than by any other English institution: she said that a
like system in France would have prevented the French revolution. The
distress of the masses of the people and the existence of a large
number of hungry men always ready to join the forces of disorder, are
at all times a danger to the stability of governments. It may well be
therefore that the law-abiding characteristics of the nation and the
absence of violent changes in the political constitution have been at
least partly due to the regular relief which has been granted under
the English poor law. Ever since its provisions were first thoroughly
put in execution through the efforts of the Privy Council and of the
justices in the reign of Charles I. no man has been able truthfully to
plead that he was driven to crime or desperation by absolute want.




APPENDIX I.


EXTRACTS from the Journals of the Common Council of London.

These Journals begin with the entries for the year 1416 and are still
continued. They are contained in large folio volumes and are written on
paper in French, Latin and English. The entries made in the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries are generally in English. The resolutions of
the Common Council and the chief letters, precepts and proclamations
concerning the government of the City were copied within a few days
of the time they were made by one of the officials under the Town
Clerk[731].

[731] There were four clerks under the Town Clerk whose duties were
defined in 1537. The youngest of these was to enter into the Journals
acts of Common Council, degrees, proclamations and precepts and all
other things necessary for the business of the City. Repertory ix. f.
251 b. quoted by Dr Sharpe, "Calendar of Letters from the Mayor and
Corporation of the City of London 1350 to 1370." Intro. p. xxiv. seq.

The following two extracts illustrate the fact that the organisation
for the poor in London was municipal, both before and after the statute
of 1572[732], and show the methods by which the City authorities
enforced their orders.

[732] 14 Eliz. c. 5. See above, pp. 70, 97.

A. Copy in the Journals of a precept for a collection for the poor
issued in 1563. _Journals_, XVIII. f. 145 b.

 By the Maio^r.

 [Sidenote: To thalderman of the warde of Cheape. A precept for to make
 a collection for the pore.]

 Whear as there was a precept dated the VII^{th} of this present
 September directed to all and every parsone, vicar, curate and
 churchwarden of every parishe churche w^{th}in yo^r saide warde
 com(m)aunding them that they and euery of them should cause the
 Inhabitants of there saide parishe to assemble them selues together
 and make a colleccion and provysyon for the pore, sick and nedye of
 there saide parishe and, if there saide parishe were not afflicted and
 had no nede of any suche provysion, that then they shoulde bestowe the
 same vpon other pore paryshes w^{th}in the saide Cittye where they
 shoulde think it moste nedefull. Forasmuche as the execucon of suche
 diligence therin towardes the poores releif hath taken no suche good
 successe as was hoped for, And understanding, the great visytacon
 of god to continew and sicknes to encrease and perceyving also by
 complaynt of the nedye there miserable estate, These are therefore
 to requyer and in the Quenes Ma^{ts} name to charge and comaunde you
 that you cale before you the saide parsone, vicar and churchwardens
 of euery parishe churche w^{th}in yo^r saide warde, once every weke,
 and that you see o^r saide precept putt in execucon according to the
 Teno^r therof and the charytye collected to be bestowed accordingly.
 Requyring ye to take suche order w^{th} them as either refuse orells
 be found negligent in doing there dutyes therin (if by gentyll
 monytion to them geven) they will not be reformed as yo^r discression
 shall seme good. Fayle ye not hereof As ye will answere for the
 contrarye at yo^r perill, yeoven at the Guildhall of the saide Cittye
 the last of this present moneth of September 1563.

      Blackwell J.C.


B. Copy in the Journals of a precept for a collection in February
1573/4. _Journals_, XX. I. f. 119.

 By the maio^r.

 [Sidenote: A precept for the collection fo^r the poore.]

 Albeit that, accordinge to the late statute made fo^r releif the
 poore, eu(er)ye personne inhabitinge w^{th}in this city and liberties
 of the same haue byne seu(er)ally taxed, yet the nombe^r of the
 poore is so great that the same colleccons notw^{th}standinge beinge
 faithfully disposed amonge them in this hard tyme many poore,
 impotent, sicke and deseased people lyue in great penury and neede
 redy to be famished fo^r lack of releif. And to thend the sayd poore
 may be charitably provided fo^r, theis shalbe to will and require you
 that you take such order in yo^r ward by yo^r self or by yo^r deputy
 that the churchwarde(n)s of eu(er)y parishe churche w^{th}in yo^r
 sayd ward at everye sermon readinge o^r service in the sayd parishe
 churches collect and gather the devocon and charitable almose of well
 disposed people towardes the releif and maintenaunce of the sayd poore
 to be distributed in suche parishes of this city as hath most neede
 thereof and as shalbe appoynted by suche persons as shalbe named by
 the lord maio^r of this city fo^r the tyme beinge fo^r the distribucon
 of the same. And also that you cause eu(er)y preacher and reder of
 eu(er)y such sermon and readinge and also eu(er)y parsone, vicarre
 and curate of the sayd parishe churches w^{th}in yo^r sayd ward to
 be moued gently to exhort there audience charitably to gyue ther
 almose for the end and purpose afforesayd. And further that you cause
 diligent serch to be made from tyme to tyme through out yo^r sayd ward
 fo^r all such poore as shalbe newly com into yo^r sayd ward out of the
 country o^r ells where. And to take order fo^r thavoydinge of the same
 with all speede, fayle ye not hereof etc. Yeoven at the guildhall of
 the City of London the XVII{th} of february 1573.

      Stapleton.




APPENDIX II.


EXTRACT relating to the parish of St Peter's of Southgate, from the
census of the poor taken at Norwich recorded in the "Maioris Bocke for
the Pore[733], made in the feaste of St John the Baptiste 1576" and
continued down to 1580.

[733] The "Maioris Bocke for the Pore" and a second large book
at Norwich entitled "The Booke for the Poore," have been already
described. See note, p. 102.

 Theis be the names[734] of the poore within the saide Citie as they
 ware vewed in the yere of our lord god 1570. In the tyme of M^r John
 Alldereche maior.

 [734] From "names" down to "weekelye" is written with a different ink
 from the rest of the entry and was apparently inserted at another time.

                    THE WARDE OF SOUTHE CONSFORTHE.
              Names of the poore to be relieved weekelye.
                      In St Peters of Southgate.

 [Sidenote: In the house of Robt. Susling. no allmns and vrie pore but
 able to worke]

 Richard Bitche of the age of 35 yeres, a husbondman which worketh with
 Mrs Cantrell and kepith not with his wife (but at tymes) and helpith
 her little. And Margarit his wyfe of the age of 40 yeres she spinne
 white warpe and Jone her doughter, of the age of 12 yeres, that spinne
 allso the same. And Simond her sonne of the age of 8 yeres that goe
 to scoole. And Alice and Faithe? the eldiste of the age of 8 yeres
 and the other of the age of 3 yeres, And haue dwelt here ii yeres and
 sence Witsontyde and haue dwelt moste parte at Banham where thaie ware
 maried and since at Swanton next Norwaltham and Amringall.

 [Sidenote: the house of the gates. iiii^d a weke and verie pore but
 able to worke]

 Peter Browne (porter) a cobler of the age of 50 yeres and hath little
 woorke. And Agnes his wyfe of the age of 52 yeres that workith not,
 but have bene sicke since Christmas (but in helth now) she spinne
 white warpe havinge three doughters, the one of the age of 18 yeres,
 the other of the age of 14 yeres, and the other of the age of 13
 yeres, the which all spinne when they can get it, but now they ar
 without worke: thaie have dwelt here theis twentie yeres, and thaie
 haue one doughter Elizabethe w^{ch} is idle and is sent from service
 where she dwelt with Willm. Nought of Thorp iii quarters of a yere.

 [Sidenote: in the house of his owne but now in morgadge. iiii^d a weke]

 Thomasse Claxon, boote wrighte, is abrode at worke, and comfort his
 wife to his power, and is of the age of 43 yeres, and Anne his wyfe
 that is of the age of 27 yeres, and ii sonnes; the eldiste of the
 age of 4 yeres: she spinne white warp, he hathe dwelt here ever and
 now she lyeth in childebed, and theie be indifferentlie stowred with
 househoulde stuffe.

 Thomas Mathew laborer, who is gonne from his wyfe beinge of the age
 of 40 yeres, from whome she hath no help, and Margarit his wyfe, of
 the age of 32 yeres, and haue no childrene, she spinne white warp, and
 have dwelt here (ever) and knoweth not where her husbond is.

 [Sidenote: in monfor]

 Henrie Bisbioke mason, of the age of 46 yeres, and Elizabeth his wyfe,
 of the age of 30 yeres: and two sonnes the eldist three yeres of age:
 she spinne white warpe.

 [Sidenote: in the first tower. no almns verie pore but able to worke.]

 Willm. Bridges of the age of 40 yeres (a laborer) and Jone his wyfe,
 of the age of 23 yeres, she spinne white warp, havinge one sonne,
 and one doughter: the eldist of the age of 8 yeres, and thaie kepe
 together and haue dwelt here eyght yeres.

 Allso there is Thomas Warde and his wyfe but these liue uppon there
 labor.

 [Sidenote: At gaywodes. no almns indifferent able to worke.]

 James Taylor, a taylor, of the age of 30 yeres (now in prisonne,
 in the Gylde haule) and Margarit his wyfe, of the age of 30 yeres,
 which spinneth white warp, and was Linstis wyfe that was so longe in
 prisonne and havinge one childe beinge a sonne, of the age of eyght
 yeres theie haue dwelt here since Michelmas, last past, but she liue
 of her labor and dwell w^{th}in Gaywode at monforthes.

 [Sidenote: Calistones house. indifferent no al(m)ns.]

 Thomas Willsonne, of the age of 30 yeres a baskitmaker, and Katherin
 his wyfe of the age of 25 yeres who maketh buttonnes, havinge two
 doughters the eldist of the age of 5 yeres, thaie haue dwelt here ever.

 [Sidenote: Edward Paulms house.]

 Michaell Cocke, of the age of 40 yeres a laborer and[735]     his wyfe,
 of the age of 50 yeres; they liue together, and have dwelt here aboue
 three yeres.

 [735] A space is left in the manuscript.

 [Sidenote: Palmes house. verie pore no allmns.]

 Nicholas Feelde of the age of 30 yeres sometyme a painter, and Beeth?
 his wyfe of the age of 30 yeres who spinne white warp hauinge two
 sonnes, the eldist of the age of 6 yeres, and haue dwelt here ever.


                        IN SOUTH CONNESFORTHE.
         The names of the poore to be relieved weekelye[736].
               St. Andries, St. Edmondes, St. Julianes.

 [736] From "In" to "weekelye" is written in another ink.

 [Sidenote: Indifferent able to worke. no all(m)ns.]

 John Soule of the age of 40 yeres, a laborer, and Alice his wyfe of
 the age of 23 yeres, who spinne white warpe, havinge no children, and
 they liue together and have dwelt here ever.

      etc.




APPENDIX III.


EXTRACTS from the "Orders for the poor" drawn up in Norwich, 3rd May,
1571.

These are entered in a smaller folio volume entitled "The Book for the
poore. Mr John Aldriche maio^r." It concerns the organisation of the
poor in Norwich between the years 1571 and 1580.

 _Orders for the poor._

 [Sidenote: None to begge in payne of vi stripes.]

 "1. Fyrst that no parson or parsons olde or yonge shalbe suffred to go
 abrode after a generall warninge gyven, or be founde a beggynge in the
 stretes at the sermon or at anie mans dore or at anie place within the
 Citie in payne of sixe stripes with a whippe.

 [Sidenote: None to sustayne anie beggars at ther dores in paine of y^e
 statutes.]

 2. Not that anie parson or parsons, shall sustayne or fede anye
 such beggers at their dores in payne of such fyne as is appoynted
 by statute and further to paye for everi tyme fower pence, to be
 collected by the deacons, and to go to the use of the poore within the
 seide Citie.

 [Sidenote: A working place at the Normans for men and women.]

 3. Item that at the house called the Normans in the convenienteste
 place therfor, shall be appointed a workinge place, aswell for men as
 for women viz. for the men to be prepard forteyne mawlte quernes to
 grinde mawlte and suche excersises. And for the women to spinne and
 carde and such lyke exersises.

 [Sidenote: Twelve parsons to be set a worke & of ther kepinge &
 continuance.]

 Which workinge place shall contayne to sett twelve parsons or more
 upon worke which parsons shall be kepte as presonars to worke for
 meate and drinke for the space of twentie and one dayes at the leaste
 and longer yf cause serve and they shall not eate but as they can
 earne (excepte som frende wyll be bownde for them) that the Citie
 shall nomore be troubled with them with this proviso that such parsons
 as shallbe thether comytted shall be suche as be hable to worke and
 daielie notwithstandinge wyll not worke but rather begge, or be
 withoute master or husbonde, or ellis be vacabowndes or loyterers.

 [Sidenote: The howres to worke both wynter and somer.]

 Whiche parsons shall begynne their woorkes at fyve of the clok in
 somer viz^t from ower Ladie the an(n)unciacion untyll Myhellmes, and
 shall ende ther workes at eight of the cloke at nighte, and in wynter
 to begyn at sixe of y^e cloke from Mihellmes to ower Ladie, and to
 ende ate seven of the cloke at nighte or halfe an hower past with the
 alowaunce of one halfe hower or more to eate and a quarter of an hower
 to spende in prayer.

 [Sidenote: Those sent to bridwel to be by warrante]

 And everye one sent thether shall be by warrente from the maior or his
 deputie or deputies to the balie ther, upon which warrente the balie
 shall be bownde to receive every one so sente and see them sett a
 woorke.

 [Sidenote: punishment for those that will not worke.]

 And those that shall refuse to do their workes to them appointed or
 kepe their howers to be ponissed by the whipp at the discrecion of the
 wardens or balie of the house."

(Other orders relate to the official government of the poor. The
Mayor was to be master of Bridewell, and four aldermen were to be
commissioners of the four great wards. All minor officers were to be
appointed by the commissioners.)

 "_For the balie of Bridewell._

 [Sidenote: Mr John Aldriche maior.]

 [Sidenote: The balie to be apointed to be resident & of his charge.]

 Item upon the seide awcthorite be also appointed another offycer he
 to be called the balie of bridewell, who is to be residente ther with
 his wyfe and famelie, who shall take the charge by inventorie from the
 wardens of all beddinge and other utenciles delyvered unto hym to the
 use of the workefolkes, who shall yerelie accompte with the wardens
 for the same.

 And also shall take charge of such vagabowndes men and woomen as
 to them shall be committed enforcinge them to worke by the Houres
 aforeseide. The men to grinde mawlte and other workes, and the women
 to use their handedede and, except that thei worke, not to eate.

 [Sidenote: What the balie shal take for fewel & victual.]

 And to take of them for their victuall, and fewell, or other
 necessaries as the price shall be rated and ther sett up. And to alowe
 them for their worke by the pownde (or otherwise) as shall be rated
 and sett up and shall use such correccion as is aforeseid.

 And also shall receive all stuffe thether browght and see the same
 trewlye and well used and sawfely delyverid.

 [Sidenote: What sarvantes the balie shal provide.]

 And he to provide hym of such sarvantes as in his abcens or his wyves
 shall see the workes done as it owghte to be and to do the howse
 busynes as washinge, makynge of beddes, bakinge and also to be experte
 in handedede to spynne, carde etc.

 [Sidenote: To provide an officer surveyor to go abrod to areste
 offenders and what y^e surveior shal do.]

 And also to provide one offycer survayor to go daielye abowghte the
 citie, with a staffe in his hande to areste whome that is apte for
 brydewell and brynge them to master maior or to anie of the committies
 be comaunded thether.

 And as he goeth abrode he shall certifie howe the workes in everie
 warde ar ordered and occupied and shal enforme master maior the
 committies or his master therof.

 And he shall resorte to the deacons in everi warde and be aydinge
 unto them to bringe suche as be newe commars into the citie to master
 maior, the same presentlie to be sente away agayne to the place they
 cam from. And lykewise shall bringe all disordered parsons to be
 ponissed to Bridewell yf suche shall dwell in anye warde, and shall
 gyve his whole attendaunce thervppon.

 [Sidenote: What the balie shal be alowed for his fameli.]

 And the seide balie shall be alowed for hym sylfe his wyfe sarvauntes
 and surveyor (yf he shalbe charged with his whole nombre of presoners)
 for meate, drinke and wages thirtie powndes by yere, wherof he shall
 paye fourtie shillinges a yere to a preste to mynister cervis to them
 twise a weke or elles yf he have lesse charge to have after the rate
 as by the discretion of the committies and wardeins of Bridewell shall
 be thowght convenient or as they can agree...."

(The next orders provide that twelve children shall be brought up in S.
Giles' Hospital.)

 "_Orders for children and others in wardes._

 [Sidenote: Everie single warde to have selecte women to receive to
 worke & learning suche as to them shalbe appointed]

 Item, that there be also appoynted by the committies or comissioners
 for every syngle warde so manye selecte women as shal suffyse to
 receyve of persons within that warde, viz. of women, maydens or
 children that shalbe appoynted unto them by the comitties or deacons,
 to worke or learne letters in their house or houses, of the most
 porest children whose parentes are not hable to pay for theyr learinge
 or of women and maydes that lyve ydelye or be disordred to the nomber
 of six, eight, tenne or twelve at the moste in anie one of their
 howses.

 [Sidenote: their workes howers and correccions.]

 The same to be dryven to worke and lerne, by the howers appoynted in
 bridewell and with such corrections, tyll their handes be browght into
 such use and their bodies to suche paynes as labore and learninge
 shall be easier to them than idleness and as they shall of themselves
 be hable to lyve of their owne workes with their famelies as others do.

 [Sidenote: What the selecte women shal do or se done.]

 [Sidenote: What rewards everie selecte woman shall have & yf she
 refuse, to have twentie daies impresonement.]

 And everie suche selecte woman appoynted to take charge of such
 aforeseide, shall see that suche as to them be comitted shall do ther
 woorkes trewelie and workmanlye and be learned profitablie, or ellis
 to laye sharpe correccion upon them; and everi such selecte woman
 doenge her duetie to teache or cawse to be tawghte or sett a worke, to
 have for her paynes in that behaulfe twentie shillinges by yere everi
 one of them so appoynted and nominated.

 And whoso ever selecte woman so appointed shall refuse the same beinge
 therevnto appoynted, shall suffer imprisonemente by the space of
 twentie dayes at the leaste.


 _Orders for the deacons._

 [Sidenote: Mr John Aldriche Maior.]

 [Sidenote: Deacons in everi ward to be apoynted to have the oversight of y^e
 poore of their warde.]

 [Sidenote: To have the names of y^e warde that have not remained three
 yeris to be sente awaye.]

 [Sidenote: To search onis in a moneth in paine of three shillings &
 fourpence.]

 Item that in every single warde within this citie be also appoynted
 in that order, fourme and tyme aforesyde twoo civil and experte men
 that wyll be paynefull, the same to be called deacons, whiche twoo in
 everie petie warde appoynted, shall have the oversight of the poore
 of that warde and have the names of them as well of men, women as
 chyldren. And suche as have not remayned three yeris in the Citie to
 certifie the committies therof, to be presentlie sente awaye with
 their families, and also to have a contynuall eye that no more suche
 straungers be suffred here to inhabit as be not hable to lyve of
 themselves, or be lyke to be chargeable to the citie for the which
 they shall make search everi one in their warde onis in a monethe at
 the least vpon payne of three shillinges and fower pence for everi
 tyme doenye the contrarye.

 [Sidenote: Who thei shall certifie to the comitties yt can worke not
 to ronne abowght.]

 And suche as shall have nede and remayne and that the awlmes can not
 suffyse to certifie the seide commytties of their state from tyme to
 tyme as they maye be provided for.

 And the reste that can worke, to se they ronne not abowght abegginge,
 but rather to be sett a worke.

 [Sidenote: Yt wyll not worke to be placed withe the selecte women.]

 Also all those that can and wyll not woorke to se them placed with
 suche selecte women as shall be charged with them and to kepe their
 howers to them appoynted or ellis to see correccion upon them as at
 brydewell (yf they shall refuse the correccon of their dames).

 [Sidenote: To certifie y^e names of disorderid parsons.]

 And also to certifie the nombre of disordered parsons to be ponissed
 wekelye.

 [Sidenote: To certifie y^e nomber of children not hable to be
 sustayned of them.]

 And also that the nombre of childrene under age (not hable to worke)
 and that their parentes ar not hable to sustayne to certifie aswel of
 their names ages as places inhabiting to be considerid of.

 [Sidenote: To certifie ye nombre of bigge wenches and boyes to go to
 servis.]

 And also to certifie the nombre of such bygge wenches or boyes as
 maye do cervis, not hable to be kept of their parentes, to be putt to
 cervis accordinge to the statute, and the reste to worke with their
 parentes so as they go not ydelie abowght.

 [Sidenote: Also that begge to be ponissed.]

 And whosoever olde or yonge goinge abowght to begge the same to be
 ponissed as aforesyde.

 [Sidenote: To certifie vagabonds etc. to be ponissed.]

 Also what vagaboundes or ydle loiterers, dronkerdes or disordered
 parsons doth in that warde remayne that they be certified to be
 ponissed also.

 [Sidenote: All moni or other things gyven to be done by the deacons.]

 And that all monye woode or other thinges whatsoever gyven or to be
 gyven to be distributed to the poore maye by them within everie warde
 be trewely done and recorded and the comitties made privie therunto.

 [Sidenote: that refuse to do ther duetye to forfet fortie shillinges.]

 And everi one to this office appoynted and shall refuse to do his
 duetie (in all the premisses) both trewlie and faithefullie, shall
 forfett the some of fortie shillinges the same to go to the vse of the
 poore.

 [Sidenote: one to continue for twoo yearis.]

 Of the which twoo, one of the same shall ever contynue for twoo yeris
 befor he shall go of, to the ende to enstructe the other.

 [Sidenote: The pore to receive y^e somes wekely apointed.]

 Itm yt is also orderid that the pore in everie warde shall receyve
 suche somes of money as is to them wekelie assigned at the handes at
 everie of the forseide deacons.

 [Sidenote: All giftes colleccons legaces to go to the use of the pore.]

 Item yt is also orderid that all gyftes colleccions, legacis, or
 benevolenses gyven or bequethed to the use of the poore, shall go to
 the use aforeseyde, and as ellis hereafter shall be thowght mete, to
 prepare woode or other fewell to sustayne the poore in wynter or to
 prepare them howses to dwell in or for anie other necessitie or to
 purchase some certentie of landes to maynteyne the same.

      Finis."




APPENDIX IV.

 REPORT concerning scarcity from Norfolk, 1586 (_Dom. State Papers_,
 Queen Eliz., Vol. 191, No. 12).


The following is the Report returned to the Council by the justices of
Norfolk on July 11, 1586, and also a part of one of seven certificates
which they enclose. It is addressed on the back "To the right
honourable our singuler good Lordes the Lordes of her Ma^{t's} most
honourable priuie councell," and is endorsed "11 July 1586 Justices of
peace in Norff. Price of graine."

 "May yt please your honours, after the remembraunce of our humble
 duities to be aduertized; that for a further proceedinge in the
 accomplishm^t of your honourable l[ett]res concerninge the furnishing
 of the markets w^{th} corne, wee haue according to our former
 l[ett]res of the ix^{th} of June laste, mette here together this day
 for conference therein. And pervseinge all our notes and preceedings
 together, wee fynd that thoroughe oute this sheire by suche order as
 wee haue taken withe owners and farmers and also Badgers and buyers
 of corne and graine, the markets are by them plentiefullie sarued
 everie market day withe corne, and the same solde at resonable rates,
 viz. wheat at xxii s. the quarter, rie at xvi s., maulte at xiiii s.
 and barley at xii s. of whiche kyndes of corne, the poorer sorte are
 by perswasion sarued at meaner pryces. And so wee dowbte not but yt
 shall likwyse contynue acco(r)ding to our direction vntill yt shall
 please god that new corne may be vsed. And hereof thinking yt best in
 performaunce of our duities to aduertize your honours wee humblie take
 our Leave. From Attlebrigge the xi^{th} of Julie 1586.

 Your ho: humble at comaundment

  Willm. Heydon.                    Willm. Paston.
  Clement Paston.                   Tho. Tomiested.
  Natha. Bacon.     Henrye Gawdye.  Willm. Rugges.
  Christ^r Heydon.  Morr. Bernye.   Henry Helmerton."

The following is a portion of one of the seven certificates enclosed:

  Southgrenhoo   "The certyficat of Willm. Hawke and
  hundrethe      Robt. Co(n)stable, Chieff Constables of y^e
                 said hundreth of all y^e corne and grayn
                 found by them vppon serche w^hin ye seid
                 hundrethe xxth of June 1586."

The report concerns twenty places of which North Pukenham is one.

  +------------------+-----------+-------------------+-------------+--------------+--------------+
  |                  |           |     Messelyng     |    Malt     | Y^e No(m)ber | Y^e corne to |
  | North Pukeh(a)m  |   Wheat   |       & Rye       |   barley    |    of y^e    |   (er)ve ye  |
  |                  |           |                   |             |    Persons   |     m^rket   |
  +------------------+-----------+-------------------+-------------+--------------+--------------+
  | Frances Reynolds |           |        l cobs     |    x cobs   |      10      |              |
  | John Cuves       |    i cobs |     iiij cobs     |  iij cobs   |       3      |              |
  | John Constable   |   ii      |     iiij          |  iii        |       7      |              |
  | John Egglynge    | iiij      |        v          |  iij        |       6      |              |
  | John Callibut    |   ii      |      iij          |             |       9      |              |
  | John Samlyng     |    v      |        v          |             |       4      |              |
  | James Wryght     |   ij cobs |     viii cobs     |    v cobs   |       6      |              |
  |                  |           |      iii cobs     |  iii cobs   |              |              |
  +------------------+-----------+-------------------+-------------+--------------+--------------+
  | Sm^a totall      | xvi^{co}. | iiij^{xx} ij^{co} | xxvii^{co}. |              |              |
  +------------------+-----------+-------------------+-------------+--------------+--------------+




APPENDIX V.

 PART of a draft of orders for remedying the scarcity of corn in 1586
 (Lansdowne MSS. Brit. Mus., No. 48, f. 128).

The following draft is found among the Burleigh papers. It is written
on four folio sheets on both sides, for the most part in an official
hand, but throughout it is corrected in Burleigh's own hand, and the
last portion is written entirely by him.

The orders here contained must have been substantially the same
as those issued and printed by order of the Privy Council on Jan.
4, 1586/7 since a series of reports dated in 1587 answer these
instructions point by point[737]. Most of these regulations were
suggested by the three judges, Popham, Mildmay and Manwood, to whom the
matter had been referred. Their report was considered and annotated by
Burleigh, and the following draft seems to have been based on their
conclusions[738].

[737] See above, pp. 89, 90.

[738] See above, p. 86.

Already several times during the reigns of Edward and Elizabeth similar
sets of orders had been issued in order to prevent a bread famine in
years of high-priced corn. Earlier in this year of 1586 commands had
already been sent, and reports had been received from the justices.
These orders however were more carefully considered and detailed than
any previous commands.

Orders of this kind continued to be issued throughout the reigns of
Elizabeth, James I. and Charles I., but these of January 1586/7 were
thought to have the best effect and were reprinted and reissued in
1594[739]. They thus seem to be the original form of the scarcity Book
of Orders which apparently afterwards suggested the Book of Orders for
the relief of the Poor of Jan. 1630/1.

[739] See above, p. 119.

A few of the later clauses only of this draft relate directly to the
relief of the poor, and the general character of the instructions
given in these contrast strongly with the detailed directions dealing
with the supply of grain. This bears out the contention that at this
time the direct relief of the poor was only subsidiary to the indirect
relief afforded to the poorer classes by these measures for the supply
of corn: it also indicates that the interference of the Privy Council
in the direct relief of the poor was suggested by the distress and
disorder of these years of high-priced grain, and was begun at least as
early as 1587, as one of the methods which were adopted to relieve that
distress.

Lansdowne MSS. 48, f. 128, No. 54, 27 Decembris 1586.

 _Orders devised by y^e speciall comma(n)ddment of y^e Qu. Ma^{ty}
 for y^e releiff and ease of y^e present derth of gray(ne) w^hin y^e
 realme[740]._

 [740] The portion printed in italics is written in Burleigh's own hand.

 That the Sheriffe and Justices of the peace _by spedy warni(n)g of y^e
 shyrriff_ shall ymediatlie vppon the receipte of these _orders_[741]
 assemble themselues togeather, w^{th} as much speede as they possible
 maye, and havinge conferred amongest them selves vppon the contents
 hereof, shall first for the better execucon of _the same_ devide them
 selves into sondry companies and take amongest them _into ther chardg
 by_ seu(er)all divisions _all_ the hundreds, rapes or wapentaks of the
 said countie.

 [741] "Instruccons" is deleted.

 Itm eu(er)y Companie so allotted out shall forthw^{th} direct
 their preceptes vnto the said Sheriff to warne the high cunstables
 vnder cunstables and others the most honest _and substa(n)ciall_
 inhabitants w^{th}in the same hundred, rape or wapentake to the
 number of xxxvi persons, moe or fewer as the quantetie of the hundred
 rape or wapentake shall require, to appere before them, at a certayn
 place and w^{th}in as shorte a tyme after the receipte hereof as
 they convenientlie may, and vppon the apparance of the said persons,
 they shall divide them into so many Juries as they shall thinke
 meete, gevinge instruccon to the said Sheriffe to retorne as fewe of
 such as _be known great firmers for corn or_ haue store of grayne
 to sell as he can; and such of the same _perso(n)s so warned_ as
 shall not appeare, but make default beinge somoned, and not havinge
 any _just or_ reasonable excuse _allowable by y^e justices_, to be
 punished therefore at the good discrecons of the justices _both by
 i(m)priso(n)m(e)nt and fyne_ before _whom_ they are to appere.

 Itm. they shall _first declare y^e cause why they ar sent for and
 therw^h ernestly chardg them in the feare of God to apply themselves
 to the s(er)vice wherevnto they shall be now called w^h all
 dutyfullnes and dilige(n)ce and w^hout any parciallyte to any person
 and the(n) they shall gyve them the oth followy(n)g_:--


 _The Juries Oth._

 Yo^u shall sweare &c that yo^u shall enquire and make trewe and dewe
 search and triall what nomber of persons eu(er)ye housholder that
 hath corne _in thir barns, stacks or otherwher_ aswell Justices of
 the peace as others _what so ever_ w^{th}in the parish of       have
 in their houses, (fedyng and lye(in)g and vprisyng?); what nomber of
 acres they haue _certenly_ to be sowen this yere w^{th} any mann(er) of
 grayne; what bargaynes they haue made w^{th} any person for any kynde
 of grayne to be sold by or to them; to whome and by whome and vppon
 what prices they haue made the same and what quantetie of any mann(er)
 of grayne they or any other haue in their barnes, garners, lofts,
 cellers or flowers or otherwise to be deliu(er)ed vnto them uppon any
 bargayne.

 I^{tm} what nomber of badgers, kidders, broggers[742] or cariers of
 corne doe inhabite w^{th}in the said parishe and whither they doe vse
 to carrie their corne they buy and _wher they do vsually buy the same_
 and what their names be _and how long they have vsed_ _that trade, and
 by whose lycense, and to se the same lycenses of what tenor they ar
 of_.

 [742] Badgers, kidders and broggers were all names applied to dealers,
 especially to dealers in corn and other provisions. By the 5 and 6
 Edw. VI. c. 14 badgers and kidders or kyddiers licensed by three
 justices were exempted from the penalties attached to forestallers and
 regrators; no one not so licensed might buy corn to sell again. In a
 statute of Elizabeth (5 Eliz. c. 12) they are again mentioned and the
 conditions of their license were made more stringent; no one was to be
 licensed unless he were a resident householder and the licensed dealer
 had to place security with the Clerk of the Peace that he would not
 forestall or engross corn. The words "badger" and "kidder" continued
 to be used in the licenses granted to corndealers as late as the
 eighteenth century. The word "brogger" does not occur so frequently.
 Murray states that it is apparently an unexplained corruption of
 broker, and he quotes Stow's Survey (1754), II. V. XV. "They were
 called Broggers in a statute of Richard II.--none to be Brocars in any
 mystery unless chosen by the same mystery." See also 25 Hen. VIII. c.
 1, where the word is applied to a seller of meat.

 Itm what nomber of malte makers, bakers, comen brewers _or
 tiplers_[743] dwell w^{th}in the said parish and whoe they are _by
 name and how long they have vsed y^t trade and how much they bake or
 brew in y^e weke and what other trade they have wherby otherwise to
 lyve_.

 [743] See note, p. 69.

 Itm. whoe w^{th}in the same parishe be the greate buyers of corne or
 _do (usually?)_ buye or have bought any corne or grayne to sell agayne
 or haue sold it agayne _sence Midsomer last_.

 Itm whoe w^{th}in the same parishe buyeth or haue bought or sold any
 corne vppon the ground, of whome and to whome hath the same bene
 bought or sold _and at what pryces_, and to c(er)tefie vnto vs of the
 premisses & of eu(er)ye parte thereof on the daye of       nowe next
 comynge, and _to every part of these articles you shall  bryng answer
 fro(m) poy(n)t to poynt_[744]....

 [744] The clause here omitted provides for the punishment of any
 person who should refuse to give information to the jurors. He was
 first to be "heavily rebuked"; if he still refused to tell the whole
 truth he was to be committed to prison; and if he remained obstinate
 he was to be brought before the Privy Council for further punishment
 and fine.

 That the said Justices of the peace, havinge receaved into their hands
 the verdicts of the said Juries _on every and to every poynt of ther
 chardg_, shall call at c(er)ten dayes by them to be assigned such
 persons before them of eu(er)ye parish as vppon the presentment so
 made shall appere to haue corne to spare, and vppon _dew_ consideracon
 of the nomber of persons w^{ch} ech hath in his howse _accordy(n)g
 to ther qualites_, and of the quantetie of grayne the partie hath
 toward the fyndinge of the same or otherwise to be spent in his howse
 and sowinge of his groundes, allowinge to eu(er)y housholder for his
 expenses in his house for eu(er)ye person thereof _accordy(n)g to
 ther qualite_ sufficient corne for bread and drinke betwyne this and
 the next harvest and for their seed after the rate of the sowinge of
 that contrie vppon an acre. _And tha(t)_ they shall bynd all such as
 shall appere to haue more of any kynde of grayne then shall serve to
 the vses above menconed aswell Justices of the peace as others by
 recognizance in some _good_ reasonable somes _of mony_ to observe the
 orders ensueinge viz.

 [Sidenote: The forme of the recognizance to be frely taken.]

 Ye doe knowledge yo^r self to owe vnto o^r Sou(er)aigne Ladie the
 Queenes Ma^{ties} &c. the some of &c. The condicon thereof shalbe,
 that yf ye shall well and trewlie w^{th}out fraude, covyn[745] or
 collusyon, and w^{th}out any mean deceipte or crafte, fullfill,
 observe and keepe all and eu(er)ye such orders, appoynctments and
 direccons as shall at this pre(se)nte be by vs on her Ma^{t's} behalf
 prescribed and enioyned vnto yo^u, to be by yo^u donne and fulfilled
 Then this recognizance to be voyd or els to stand in force.

 [745] I.e. collusion. The word is connected with old French _covenir_,
 modern _convenir_, to agree. It sometimes means agreement, but often,
 as here, has an unfavourable connotation.

 The orders to be by yo^u observed be these viz.

 Yo^u shall bringe or cause to be brought weekelye so many quarters or
 bushells of corne as wheate, rye, barlie, malte, pease, beanes, or
 other grayne, or so much thereof as shall not be _directly_ sold to
 the pore artificers or daye laborers of the parishe w^{th}in w^{ch}
 yo^u dwell by order of the Justice of the peace of the division
 w^{th}in w^{ch} yo^u do dwell or of two of them, to the market of
       there to be by yo^u or at yo^r assignement  sold vnto the
 Queenes subiects in open markett by half quarters, two bushells, one
 bushell or lesse as the buyer shall require of yo^u and not in greater
 quantetie, excepte it be to a Badger or carier of corne admitted
 accordinge to the statut, or to a comon knowen bruer _or_ baker,
 havinge testimonye vnder the hand and seale of some _twoo_ justices of
 the peace _at ye lest_ of the division or _of a_ mayo^r or other hed
 officer of the Cittie, Towne or Borrough _corporat_ where he dwelleth
 that he is a _co(mm)en_ Brewer _or_ Baker w^{th}in the same, or to
 such other person as shall make provision for any Lord sp(irit)uall
 or temporall, knighte or other gentleman _y^t hath no provisio(n)
 of corn of ther own so as y^e former person_ hav & show vnto such
 person as shall haue the over sighte of the markett in that behalf
 testymonye vnder the hand and Seale of the partie for whome _he cometh
 to y^e market_ to make that provision declaringe that it is for the
 provision of his howse and conteyninge the quantetie & kynd of grayne
 to be provided: and yo^u shall not willinglie leave any parte of yo^r
 corne, so brought to that market, vnsold yf money be offered to yo^u
 fo(r) th(e) same by any that are permitted to buy the same after the
 vsuall price of the markett there that daye, _nether shall you fro(m)
 y^e begy(n)ning of y^e markett to y^e full end therof kepe or cause
 to_ _be kept any part of your sayd corn out of y^e oppen sight of y^e
 markett_[746]....

 [746] The clauses here omitted relate to the safe housing of the
 unsold corn after the market, and to the remedying of miscalculations
 as to the quantity of corn the farmer has to sell.

 Ye shall buye noe corne to sell it agayne.

 Ye shall neyther buy nor sell any mann(er) of corne but in the open
 market, vnlesse the same be to pore handiecraftesmen or dayelaborers
 w^{th}in the parish where yo^u doe dwell y^t _can not conveniently
 come to y^e markett towns by reaso(n) of dista(n)ce of place,
 accordinge_ to such direccon as shalbe geven vnto yo^u in that behalf
 by the Justices of the peace of that division w^{th}in w^{ch} yo^u doe
 dwell or two of them, and to none of these above one bushell at a tyme.

 That the Justices of the peace w^{th}in their seu(er)all divisions
 haue speciall regard that engrossers of corne be carefully seene vnto
 and severely punished accordinge to the lawe, and wher such are found,
 to make certificate thereof and of the proves to the _Q. Ma^{ty's}_
 Attorney gen(er)all for the tyme beinge whoe is directed _spedeli_
 to informe against them for the same and _to se also_ that none be
 permitted to buy any corne to sell agayne but by _speciall_ license.

 That they take order w^{th} the comen bakers[747] for the bakinge
 of Rye, barlie, pease and beanes for the vse of the pore, and that
 they appoyncte speciall and fytt persons diligentlie to see their
 people well dealt w^{th}all by the _co(mm)en_ bakers and Brewers in
 all Townes and places in their weight and ass(ize) and effectually to
 enquire for and search out the default therein, and there-vppon to
 geve order for punishment of the offendo^{rs} severely accordinge to
 the lawe, _and wher any notable offe(n)ce shall be in the bakers to
 cause y^e bread to be sold to y^e porar sort vnder y^e ordynary pryces
 in part of punishment of y^e baker_.

 [747] Lord Burleigh has here underlined for omission the following
 words: "that the bread they bake of wheate only be all of one sort
 w^{th}out takinge out of any of the flower for a fyner sort dueringe
 this tyme of dearth and."

 That noe Badgers of corne, bakers _or_ Brewers doe buy any grayne
 or couinne[748] or bargayne for the same but in the tyme of open
 markette, and that but by license vnder the hande of the Justices
 of the division where they doe dwell or three of them, and that
 they weekely bringe their license w^{th} them to the markett where
 they doe eyther buye or sell, and that the license conteyne how
 much grayne, of what kynde and for what place they are licensed to
 buy and carrie, that there be set downe vppon the license the daye,
 place, quantetie and price the corne is bought at, that they take but
 measurablie for the cariadge bakinge and brewinge thereof, that they
 showe their booke weekely to such, as the Justice of the division
 wherein they dwell shall appoyncte, beinge noe bakers _or_ Badgers of
 Corne. And that those _p(er)so(n)s_ eu(er)ye xiiii dayes make reporte
 to the Justice of the division wherein they dwell how the people are
 dealt w^{th}all by the badgers, bakers and Brewers. And that such as
 have otherwyse sufficient to lyve on _or that ar knowen to be of any
 crime or evill behavor_ be not permitted to be badgers of corne, nor
 any badgers to be permitted but such as the statut doth lymitt, and
 that none be permitted to buy or provide corne in the market in grosse
 as badger or baker and such lyke, _uppo(n) payn of i(m)prisonm^t,
 vntill_ one hower after the full markett _be begon_ that the pore
 _may_ be first served.

 [748] I.e. agree. See note above.

 That the said Justices or _twoe or_ one of them at the least in
 eu(er)ye division shalbe personallie presente at eu(er)ye market
 w^{th}in their seu(er)all divisions to see the orders to be taken by
 thauctoretie hereof to be well observed and the pore people provided
 of necessarie corne _and that w^has much favor in y^e pryces as by
 ernest perswasio(n) of y^e justyces may be obteyned_[749]....

 [749] The clause here omitted provides that, if there are not enough
 justices in any part the Sheriff and Justices of the peace shall
 appoint some "other grave, honest and substanciall persons" to carry
 out the orders.

 That all good meanes and perswasions be vsed by the Justices in
 their seu(er)all divisions that the pore may be served of corne at
 convenyent and charitable prices.

 That there be noe buyenge or bargayninge for any kynd of corne but
 in open market, and that the justices in their seu(er)all divisions
 restrayne comen malsters of makinge barlie malte in those contries and
 places where there be otes sufficient to make malte of, for the use
 of the people, and to restrayne, aswell the brewinge of barlie malte
 by or for Alehouses or Comen Tiplers in those contries and places,
 as also the excesse vse of any kynde of malte by all comen brewers
 in all alehouses and comen Tipling howses wheresoeu(er), and that
 sufficient bondes be taken of all comen brewers, malsters and comen
 Tiplers accordinge to the trewe meaninge of this article, and that
 the unnecessarie nomber of Alehouses and comen Tipplers be forthw^{th}
 suppressed in all places and _y^t direction be gyven to all typlyng
 howses, taverns and alehouses not to suffer any perso(n)s to repayre
 thyther to eate and drynk at unseasonable tymes_.

 That the Justices vse all other good meanes _that ar not me(n)tioned
 in these orders that the_ marketts be well served and the pore
 releyved in their provisions dueringe this tyme of dearth _and y^t no
 expe(n)ce be of any gray(ne), mete for bread to fede men, be wasted
 vppo(n) fedyng of bestts, neither y^t any be spent in maky(n)g of
 a stuff called sterch, as of late theyr hath bene discovered great
 qua(n)tite expe(n)ded in that vayne matter being in no sort to be
 suffred to contynew_.

 That the justices be straightlie comaunded to see by all good meanes
 that the able people be set on worke, the howses of Correction
 provided and furnished and there ydle vagabonds _to be_ punished.

 That the Justices doe their best to have convenient stocke to be
 provided in eu(er)ye division or other place, accordinge to the statut
 for settinge the pore a worke, and the justices to vse all other good
 and politique meanes w^{th}in their seu(er)all divisions to contynewe
 and maynteyne the pore people in worke w^{th}in the parish or at the
 furthest w^{th}in the hundred or division.

 That the _maymed or hurt_ soldiers and all other impotent persons
 be carefullye seene vnto to be releived w^{th}in their seu(er)all
 parishes, hundreds or divisions, accordinge to the lawe _therfor
 provyded_, and that where the provisions form(er)lye made be not
 sufficient it may be _now for this tyme of derth_ increased; and where
 one parishe is not able to geve sufficient releife to such their pore,
 that parrishe to haue the supplye of such parishes nere adioyninge
 as have fewer pore and are better able to geve releife, _and that no
 vagabond or sturdy beggar or any y^t may otherwise gett ther lyving by
 ther labors be not suffred to wander abrod under coller of beggy(n)g
 in any town or high waye, and y^t the Justyces do presently gyve order
 that ther be p(er)so(n)s sufficiently weaponed to asist the constables
 of every town to attach such vagabo(n)ds both in ther towns side and
 high wayes and to com(m)itt them to prison w^hout bayle, but as twoe
 of y^e justyces of y^e peace n^r y^t divisio(n) shall order, and if
 the townshipp shall not obs(er)ve this order for y^e attachy(n)g and
 punisy(n)g of y^e sayd vagabo(n)ds then the justyces shall se due
 punishme(n)t by fyne uppo(n) the whole townshipp or uppo(n) such
 partyes in y^e town as shall be found in fault_.

 That the Justices of the peace doe once eu(er)ye moneth c(er)tefie
 their doings and proceadings by force of these Instruccons vnto the
 Sheriffe of the said countie, in w^{ch} c(er)tificat they shall
 also make c(er)tificat of such Justices as shalbe absent from any
 these services and the trewe cause of their absence, and shall also
 c(er)tefie the vsuall prices of all kyndes of grayne in their marketts
 for that moneth past, of all w^{ch} the same Sheriffe to c(er)tefie
 the privie Counsell once in eu(er)ye fortie dayes at the farthest, _so
 as y^t defalt in any justyce y^t shal be absent may be duly considered
 and corrected by authorety of hir Ma^{t's} counsell as reaso(n) shall
 req(u)ir and so as such perso(n)s as ar placed as Justyces for ther
 creditt may not contynew in those roomes, wherin they shall be found
 not disposed to attend such a necessary and Godly servyce as this is,
 but y^t others of better dispositio(n) may supply those roomes, if
 ther shall be ned of any such no(m)ber, as in most places is thorght
 not very nedefull, the nornber being in co(mm)on opinio(n) more
 hurtful tha(n) proffitable to Justyce_.

 And, yf any shall offend against the trewe meaninge of these
 instruccons or of any parte thereof or shall vse any sinister means to
 the defraudinge thereof, that such be severely punished accordinge to
 the lawes, and for such obstinat persons as shall not conforme them
 selves the Justices shall at their pleasure bynd to appere before _y^e
 Q. Ma^{t's}_ privie Counsell _by a daye certen_ there to be further
 dealt w^{th} _by sever_ punishment for the better ensample of _all_
 others[750]....

 [750] The rest of the manuscript contains a clause in Burleigh's
 hand which provides that justices of the peace shall act with other
 commissioners and prevent the transportation of grain and shall
 also be jointly responsible with the commissioners for the proper
 performance of this duty. The rest consists of rough jottings
 in Burleigh's hand concerning some additional matters such as
 "Tr(a)nsport of beans," "Recusants mo(n)y," &c.




APPENDIX VI.


ACCOUNTS of the Churchwardens and Overseers of the parish of
Staplegrove, Co. Somerset, for the year 1599 (Brit. Mus. Add. MSS.
30,278).

The accounts of the overseers of Staplegrove have been preserved for
several years between 1599 and 1623 (1599, 1605, 1621, 1622, and 1623).
The churchwardens' accounts also remain and begin as early as 1585 and
in some of these also payments to the poor are noted[751].

[751] Thus in the account rendered July 21st, 1588, by one churchwarden
several items of the kind occur, e.g.

  Item to a poore blynde man the v^{th} of February              iij^d.
  It. to a poore woman the xiiij^{th} of February                iij^d.
  It. to the poore howse at Lamporte the x^{th} day of November  iij^d.
  It. to a poore souldyour                                       iij^d. &c.

Later the churchwardens apparently always made a payment of 5_s._ every
half-year to the constables for lame soldiers and hospitals.

This account is of course made under the provisions of the Act of 1597
(39 Eliz. c. 3)[752].

[752] See p. 76.

 The accounts of the churchwardens and overseeors of the poore in the
 parishe of Stapelgrove for the eyare last past. This account stood
 before her maeistis Justis on the xj daye of apreill in Anno Domini
 1599.

 A noot what every man hath paid to this colletion this whole eyar that
 was set weekly to the poore.

  George Poyre                                 xj^s.
  John Wuse.                                   xviii^s.
  Anthone Gonson                               ix^s. ij^d.
  John Chattocke                               xiiij^s. viii^d.
  Thomas Harris                                vii^s. iiii^d.
  Robert Parsons                               xi^s.
  Will. Cole                                   iij^s. viii^d.
  Richard Nelcomb                              v^s. vi^d.
  John Sindercomb                              iij^s. iij^d.
  William Davy                                 ii^s. ix^d.
  Harry Chattocke                              iii^s. viii^d.
  Bartholmew Sindercomb                        xxii^d.
  William Hit before hee had his apprentis     viii^s. iiii^d.
  Thomas Perrett before hee had his apprentis  v^s.
  Wat Gale before he had his apprentis.        vi^s. viii^d.
  John Chattocke before he had his apprentis   vi^s. viii^d.

  Som. of v^{li}. xviij^s. x^d.

 A noet of every mans name that keepe anei poore body and them that
 hath taken apprentisses

  Roger Smyth kepeth William Harvy, Impot.
  Water Knight kepeth Christine Fort, Impot.
  Nicholas Cornishe kepeth Harry Gale as apprentis.
  John Chattocke tholder kepeth Jone Rison as apprentis.
  William Hit kepeth Mamwell Brice as apprentis.
  Thomas Perrot kepeth Margery Huis as apprentis.
  Walter Gale kepeth Jone Huis as apprentis.

 The namis of them that paieth quarterly to the poore and what every
 one of them hath paid the whole eyar.

  first M^r. John Switteinge  xii^s.
  John Decon                  xii^s.
  Hugh Farthinge              xii^s.
  Andrew Crosse               vii^s.
  William Whitt               i^s. vi^d.
  Mr. George Hill             i^s. vi^d.
  Water Duddroge              iii^s.
  Water Shut                  vi^s.
  Mr. Goorge Fenwell          i^s.
  Robert Westcomb             xxi^d.
  Robert Farthinge            iij^s. vi^d.
  John Parsons                ii^s. ix^d.
  William Wilse               i^s. vi^d.
  Thomas Slape                i^s.
  Thomas Rooch                iii^s.
  William Corvenell           ii^s. vi^d.
  Mr. John Gibbones           i^s. vi^d.
  John Ollyver                vi^d.
  Robert Soger                i^s. vi^d.
  M^r. Jamis Clarke           ii^s.
  Thomas Brice                i^s. iii^d.
  Bartholmew Farthinge        xviii^d.

  Som. of iiii^{li}.

  The whole
  resowte for     Som. of ix^{li}. xviii^s. x^d.
  this yeare

 The namis of all them that haue receved collection and euery one of
 them haue Receved as followith.

  first Jone Cole haue reseved               xxix^s.
  Richard Rison & his wyfe Reseved           lvii^s.
  John Gould Reseved                         xiiii^s. ii^d.
  Christian Fort Reseved                     xii^s.
  Jone Gale the wyfe of Richard Gale         xii^s.
  Margret Brice the wyfe of John Brice       vi^s. viii^d.
  Jane Hues the wyfe of Thom. Hues           xviii^d.
  Wilmoth Hunt                               xii^d.
  Johane Rison                               xii^d.
  To Roger Smyth for that his land is      } viii^s. vi^d.
    charged in St. Jamis                   }
  To Christian Fort in her sicknis and for }  iii^s. ix^d.
    wood                                   }
  To John Gould's buriall                     xii^d.
  To the tithingman for releivinge the     }
    poore strangers that were broght to    }  xii^d.
    hem                                    }
  Wee haue laid out before Christmas for   }
    Clothers for the poore & for wood and  }  xxxviii^s.
    parrell for the apprenteses            }

  disburssed som of                           ix^{li}. vi^s. vii^d.
    so there is remayninge in ou^r hande      xii^s. iii^d.

 Churchwardens

  Hugh Portman.
  John Colles.
  John Frances.
  Thomas Beaton.
  Thomas Perett & Bartholmew Sindercomb.

 Overseears

  Richer Smyth, Water Knight.
  Nicholas Cornish & John Chattocke.




APPENDIX VII.


ORDERS made by the justices responsible for Aylesham and Reipham, Co.
Norfolk, 23rd October, 1622 (Brit. Mus. Add. MSS., No. 12,496, f. 222).

The following orders were enclosed with a letter of Dec. 7th, 1622,
written by John Rycherds, one of the justices of Norfolk, to Sir
Julius Caesar[753]. Sir Julius had sent this justice the letters of
the Privy Council, regulating alehouses and the strength of beer, the
19th October, 1622, and had asked him to report as to the condition of
the country with regard to the supply of corn. John Rycherds states
that these orders had been made in the "Lymitt" where he served before
the receipt of the letter and that they dealt with all the matters
commanded in the Council's letter. After the letter had been received,
however, the matters named were again "given in perticuler charge."

[753] See above, p. 295.

Both the letter and these enclosed orders form part of the Caesar
papers.

 [Sidenote: Norff.]

 Orders conceaved and put in Execucon at Aylesham and Reipham the
 xviij^{th} and xxiij^{th} of October 1622, by the Justices of the
 Peace for the Lymitt in the Hundreds of Eynesford and South Erpinham
 in the said Cownty as followeth.

 [Sidenote: 39^o Eliz. 16.]

 That the greatest Malsters and Ingrossers of Barly be suppresed in
 parte or in the whole, whereby much Barly may be staied from maltinge,
 for bread for the poore, which is nowe wastfullye consumed in stronge
 Beere vpon riotous drunkards while the poore Labourers want bread.

 [Sidenote: 23^o Hen. 8^o 4^o. 2^o Jac. 4^o. 4^o Jac. 4 & 5.]

 That Brewers be not permitted to sell Beere to Alehowsekeepers aboue
 the rates of 6^s 8^d a barrell, the best, & iiij^s iiij^d the small,
 accordinge to the rates agreed vpon at the gen(er)all Sessions of
 the peace houlden at the Castle of Norw^{ch} at Easter last. And
 that they brewe aswell small beare as stronge, and be restrayned from
 makinge of Malt.

 [Sidenote: 51^o H. 3. 51 Ed. 1[754].]

 [754] Probably intended for the 13 Ed. I.

 That Bakers keepe the Assise of bread accordinge to the price of
 corne, that they bake but the three sorts of bread appointed by the
 lawe and sell but 13 to the doz. That Cakes and Finger breade be
 restrayned in Innes and Alehowses.

 [Sidenote: 8^o H. 6. 5^o. 10 H. 7. 4^o.]

 That Troy weights be provided in Townes where Bakers do dwell and
 where they utter bread, and that the Constables w^{th} the overseers
 of the poore there, doe weekelie weigh and survey the bread baked
 there or brought thither.

 [Sidenote: 39^o Eliz. 4^o. 43^o Eliz. 3^o. 7^o Jac. 4^o.]

 That poore people be not permitted to wander and begge out of the
 parishe where they dwell but kept at worke and that worke be prouided
 for those that cannot gett worke themselues and that such be compelled
 to doe their worke well that the stocke be not consumed.

 That poore children be put to Schoole to knittinge and spinninge
 dames, and the Churchwardens and Ouerseers for the poore to paie the
 Schoole dames their wages, where the parents are not able.

 [Sidenote: 39^o Eliz. 4^o. 43^o Eliz. 3^o. 1^o Jac. 7^o. 7^o Jac. 4^o.
 11^o H. 7. 2^o. 5 & 6 E. 6. 25^o.]

 Rogues and wanderers to be corrected and ordered accordinge to lawe,
 and the constables to be punished that do neglect y^t, for they are
 the Roguemakers.

 Superfluous Alehowses to be both suppressed and kept downe, and that
 none be permitted to be Alehowsekeepers but those that are licensed by
 the gen(er)all consent of the Justice of the Lymitt, that best knowe
 both the conveniency of the places, the necessitie of an Alehowse
 there, and the abilitie and condicon of the Alehowsekeeper, and
 accordinge to the Articles heretofore agreed vpon betwene the Judges
 of the Assises for that County and subscribed by the Justices of the
 peace there.

 [Sidenote: 1^o Eliz. 2. 23 Eliz. 1^o. 1^o Jac. 9. 4 & 5 Jac. 4 & 5. 7
 Jac. 10. 3 Jac. 4^o. 5 E. 6.]

 That all the good Lawes ordained for the goverment of Alehowses
 licensed and vnlicensed the Alehowsekeepers, the Brewers, (who are
 the principall Causers both of the excessive nomber and of the great
 disorders in those howses), the idle Tipplers, the blasphemours,
 drunkards or excessive drinkers and the Absent from Church be seuerely
 and constantly put and kept in Execucon.

 That the Lawes against Ingrossers, Forestallers and Regrato^{rs}
 of Corne & victualles be looked vnto and the offenders punished
 accordinge to the Lawes.

 For all or most of these there are good Lawes prouided, if the
 Justices w^{th} one gen(er)all Consent be carefull to putt their
 lief vnto them. But there is one other mayne inconvenience w^{ch}
 to remedie will require power from the ho^{ble} Board, and that is,
 That the great owners of Corne aswell farmo^{rs} as others do not
 thresh out their owne Corne, but buy all they spend or Sowe either
 at the Marketts or of poore small farmo^{rs} that are constrayned to
 sell nowe and yett must buy againe before Harvest next for their owne
 expence w^{ch} doth both encrease the prices of all grayne, and by
 that meanes all the Corne is brought into a fewe handes who then make
 the prices at their owne pleasure. If theis things be provided for
 and duly putt in execucon, there wilbee Corne enough found and spared
 for the people of our Countrey w^{th}out inquiringe or examininge
 perticuler mens store, w^{ch} doth but discouer the want and there bie
 inhaunce the prices, but augments not the store.




APPENDIX VIII.


REPORT of the justices from Lackford and the half hundred of Exning
February 7th, 1622/3. Dom. State Papers James I. Vol. 142. 14. 1.

The following is one of nine reports forwarded by the Sheriff of
Suffolk to the Lords of the Privy Council on April 2nd, 1623.

All nine returns together with many others were sent in reply to
orders of the Privy Council issued in consequence of the distress in
1622-3[755]. If we compare this reply with the draft of the orders
corrected by Burleigh in 1586 (App. V.), we shall see that the orders
issued in 1623 must have been substantially the same as those of
1586/7. This report also shows, like the orders themselves, that the
direct relief of the poor was improved in consequence of the measures
of the years of scarcity.

[755] See above, p. 145 seq.

 [Sidenote: Suff.]

 A Certificate to y^e right hono^{ble} y^e Lords and others of his
 Ma^{ties} most hono^{ble} Priuie Councell.

 The quantitie of corne and grayne w^{th}in y^e hundred of Lackeford
 and y^e halfe hundred of Exninge, taken y^e 7th. day of Februarie
 a(nn)o regni regis Jacobi Angliæ 20^o a(nn)oq(ue) d(omi)ni 1622 by
 presentm^t, and inquiry of a Jury in y^e said hundred and halfe
 accordinge to his Ma^{ties} booke, is as followeth.

 Inprim. in wheate two hundred fiue score and ten Com^{bs} and thre
 bush^{lls}.

 In Rye thre thousand and two combes.

 In Barly eight thousand thre hundreth and fiftie fiue com^{bs}.

 In Malte foure thousand, twenty seauen combes and thre bushells.

 In Pease foure hundreth twentye seauen combs and thre bushells.

 Deductions out of this

 For persons remayninge in y^e houses of those y^t haue y^e said corne
 for their mainetenance till Haruest fouretene hundred threscore and
 two persons.

 For Lands to be sowen this yeare followinge beinge six thousand
 thirtie fiue acres.

 For forehand bargaines to be deliu(er)ed w^{ch} amounts to seauen
 hundred fiftie foure combes and two bushells.

 For Sheepheardes wages ten score and foureteene combes.

 For wheate, rie, barly, malt, sheepheards wage, and Pease six score is
 accounted to each hundred; for persons in house, lands to be sowen,
 forehand bargaines as aforesaid, fiue score is accounted for each
 hundred.

 There beinge within the hundred of Lackeford diu(er)ssome Townes,
 consistinge of a greate number of miserable poore people w^{ch}
 neither plowe nor sowe for Corne, we thinke in o^r opinions and
 iudgem^{ts} y^t all y^e corne and graine aforesaid, the said poore
 people beinge prouided for, and the deductions beinge allowed as
 before is expressed, will hardely serue y^e people nowe inhabitinge
 within the said hundred, and halfe vntill haruest next.

 For y^e Marketts within y^e hundred and halfe aforesaid they are nowe
 sufficiently furnished with corne and graine, the poorer sorte of
 people within the seuerall townes and places are ordered to be sett
 on worke, hauinge caused these deere times y^e weekely collections of
 each towne for y^e poore to be raysed and augemented. And y^e better
 sorte of people that haue corne doe sell to the poore of each towne
 within y^e hundred and halfe eight pence, ten pence and some twelue
 pence in y^e bushell vnder y^e value y^t corne is sold in the next
 adioyninge marketts.

 For Maltsters, Brewers Ingrossers and millers wee haue taken such
 order as by his Ma^{tie} is com(m)anded.

 The prizes of corne and other grayne sold at y^e last markett day at
 Mildenhall beinge y^e xxviii^{th}. of Februarie is

  For wheate y^e combe    xxii^s.
  for rie y^e combe       xvii^s. iiij^d.
  for barly y^e combe     xiij^s. vi^d.
  for pease y^e combe     x^s. viii^d.
  oates y^e combe         vi^s. viii^d.

 This wee y^e justices of y^e Peace inhabitinge within the hundreds
 aforesaid accordinge to o^r bounden duties doe most humbly certifie.

      J. Heightting?, Roger North.
      Joh. Smythe.




APPENDIX IX.

Extracts from the Privy Council Register.


Copy of a letter sent to the Deputy Lieutenants and Justices of the
Peace in the Counties of Suffolk and Essex concerning the employment
of the poor. Privy Council Register[756] Chas. I. Vol. V. f. 263, 22nd
May, 1629[757].

[756] See above, p. 143, note.

[757] _Ib._, p. 154.

 [Sidenote: Dated the 22nd. Signed

  Lo. Trer.
  Lo. Privie Seale
  Lo. High Chamb.
  Lo. Steward
  Lo. Chamb.
  Ea. of Suffolk
  Ea. of Dorsett
  Ea. of Holland
  Lo. Chanc. of Scotland
  Lo. Vic. Dorchester
  Lo. Vic. Grandison
  Lo. Vic. Wilmot
  Lo. Bp. of London
  Lo. Bp. of Winton
  Mr. Trer.
  Mr. Vic. Chamb.
  Mr. of the Wardes
  Mr. Chanc. of the Ex^r.
 ]

 "Whereas wee by special direccons of his Ma^{tie} did lately commend
 unto yo^r care the present state of those parts of y^r county where
 the poore clothiers and their workmen at present destitute of worke
 might some other way be imployed or for the tyme be releeved till some
 obstructions to trade were remooved, as also to kepe in order those
 that are loose and ill disposed people. To w^{ch} end his Ma^{tie} by
 advise of his Privie Councell and the Judges hath lately published a
 proclamacon declaring his pleasure and command; in what manner the
 truly poore and impotent should be relieved, those of able bodies
 should be sett on worke and imployed in honest labors and the sturdie,
 idle and dangerous roagues and vagabonds should be repressed and
 punished w^{ch} proclamacon you shall herew^{th} likewise receive.
 Now, bycause wee understand that in yo^r countie there is more than
 ordinarie occasion to use all dilligence and industrie at this time,
 wee have thought fitt to putt yo^u more particularlie in minde
 thereof, and in answere of yo^r l(ett)res to lett yo^u know that it is
 the resolucon of all the Judges, that by the lawe yo^u have sufficient
 power and ought to raise meanes out of the severall Parishes if
 they be of abilitie, or otherwise in their defect in their severall
 Hundrethes, Lathes or Wapentakes, and for want of their abilitie (to
 sett yo^r poore on worke and to relieve the aged and impotent not able
 to worke) in the whole bodie of the county, wherefore his Ma^{tie}
 commands that the wayes provided by lawe in theise cases be duely
 followed w^{th} all diligence and possible speede. You are required
 to understand the true state of the country from the ministers,
 churchwardens and overseers of the severall parishes w^{th}in your
 severall divisions. And what rests herein to be done by order at the
 Quarter Sessions, the judges advise that for this purpose you may call
 the Quarter Sessions sooner then the ordinary sett tymes and doe that
 w^{ch} in this case is so requisite. Further wee lett yo^u to know,
 that such hath bin his Ma^{t's} care and personall paines taken to
 remove theis impediments, that of late have bin to trade and to open
 a free vent to the commodities of yo^r country, that yo^rselves will
 shortily see the fruits of it to yo^r comforts neverthelesse in the
 meane tyme theise things provided by the lawe and the helpes that by
 yo^r care may be added are in no sorte to bee neglected, but exactly
 pursued of w^{ch} yo^r proceedings wee are to bee advertised that so
 wee may render account thereof to his Ma^{tie}. And so etc.

 [Sidenote: Ut supra.]

 A like warrant or lre to the Deputy Lieutenants and Justices of the
 Peace in the Countie of Suffolk, dated and signed ut supra.




APPENDIX X.

Extracts from the Privy Council Register (continued).


Letter concerning the disturbances in Rutlandshire (_Privy Council
Register_, Vol. VI. f. 345. 15th Feb. 1630/1).

This entry illustrates the connection between efforts to improve poor
relief and the maintenance of order.

 A Lre to S^r Edward Harrington, Sir Hen. Mackworth Bar^t S^r Guy
 Palmer K^t and Basill Fielding Esq^r or any twoe of them.

 [Sidenote:

  Lo. Keeper.
  Lo. Trear.
  Lo. Privie Seale.
  Ea. Marshall.
  Lo. V. Wentworth.
  Lo. Bp. of Winton.
  Mr Trear.
  Mr Comptroler.
  Mr Secre. Coke.
 ]

 Whereas we have beene made acquainted w^{th} a lre written by John
 Wildbore a Minister in and aboute Tinwell w^{th}in that County to
 a friend of his here wherein after some mencon by him made of the
 present want and miserie sustayned by the poorer sorte in those parts
 through the dearth of Corne and the want of worke, he doth advertize
 in particular some speeches uttered by a shoomaker of Uppingham
 (whose name wee finde not) tending to the stirring upp of the poore
 theraboute to a mutiny and insurreccon. W^{ch} informacon was as
 followeth in hæc verba "Hearest thou" saith a Shoomaker of Uppingham
 to a poore man of Liddington "if thou wilte be secrett I will make
 a mocon to thee." "What is yo^r Mocon?" saith the other. Then said
 the Shoomaker "The poore men of Okeham have sent to us poore men of
 Uppingham and if you poore men of Liddington will ioyne w^{th} us wee
 will rise and the poore of Okeham say they can have all the Armour of
 the Countrie in theire power w^{th}in halfe an hower, and (in faith
 saith he) we will ryfle the churles." Upon consideracon had therof
 however this Board is not easily credilous of light reports nor apte
 to take impression from the vaine speeches or eiaculacons of some
 meane and contemptible persons. Yet because it sorts well w^{th} the
 care and providence of a State to prevent all occasions w^{ch} ill
 affected persons may otherwise lay hold of under pretence and collour
 of the necessitie of the tyme, we have thought good hereby to will and
 require you the Deputy Lieuts. and Justices of peace next adioyneing
 forthw^{th} to apprehend and take a more particular examinacon aswell
 of the said Shoomaker as of such others as you shall thinke fitt
 concerning the advertizement aforesaid. And that you take especial
 care that the Armes of that County in and aboute those parts be safely
 disposed of. And lykewise (w^{ch} is indeede most considerable and the
 best meanes to prevent all disorders in this kinde) that you deale
 effectually in causeing the markett to be well supplyed w^{th} corne
 and the poore to be served at reasonable prices and sett on worke by
 those of the richer sorte and by rayseing of stocke to releeve and
 sett them on worke according to the lawes. All w^{ch} we recomende to
 yo^r especiall care and require an account from you of yo^r doeings
 and proceedings herein w^{th} all convenient expedicon. And soe &c.




APPENDIX XI.


Letter from Sir Thomas Barrington concerning the eight hundreds of
Yorkshire (_Dom. State Papers_, Chas. I. Vol. 177, No. 31. 21st Dec.
1630).

The following letter is substantially like many other justices' reports
relating to the corn measures of 1629-1631. This document, like a few
others of the same kind, preceded the issue of the Book of Orders of
Jan. 1630/1; and was sent in answer to previous orders of the Privy
Council[758]. It is addressed on the back "To the right Hon^{le} my
most hon^d Lo. the Lo. viceCount Dorchester[759] at his lodgings in
Whitehall"; and has attached to it a seal with a crest and also the
date 1630.

[758] See above, p. 172.

[759] Lord Dorchester had been appointed one of the special
commissioners for the poor in June 1630. See above, pp. 156, 164.

 My Lo., the assurance y^t I haue of yo^r Lo^{ps} desyre to understand
 y^e carefull and successfull execution of y^e late commaunds w^{ch}
 we haue receiued, and feareing least y^e high Sheriff may delay
 y^e retourning of owr certifficates; I shall take the bouldnes to
 aduertize yo^r Lo^p that haueing attended the seruice inioyned by
 his Ma^{ts} instructions and yo^r Lo^{ps} letters in eight hundreds
 of this Countie, (as yo^r Lo^p will find when y^e Cirtificates are
 retourned) we haue followed those directions giuen us conserneing
 Badgers[760], Millers etc. a sort of people y^t did much rayse y^e
 prizes of Corne; but I hope we haue preuented it for y^e future, som
 of them being bound to y^e Sessions, others ouerlooked w^{th} a strict
 eye that theay offend not as theay haue done; we find the Marketts
 to be well serued; and tharefor no compulsion yet needes to be used
 as yet; we haue furthermore taken care (w^{ch} I conceiue to be yo^r
 Lo^{ps} chiefe ayme) that the poorer sort be prouided for by y^e
 laying in of Corne in euery Toune sufficient to satisfy them for this
 yeear, and y^t at such rates, as y^e scarcytye and dirth of theise
 times will be y^e less bitter unto them, when theay shall haue it
 18^d. and 2^s. in y^e Bushell cheaper then y^e Markett can afford,
 as vpon calling y^e countrye together we haue easyly perswaded them
 heearunto, & y^e most parishes haue allready begun this worke, w^{ch}
 if it answar not yo^r Lo^{ps} desyres I shall be sorye y^t I was one
 of y^e first moouers heearin; in y^e same forme y^t I exprest unto
 yo^r Lo^p when I wayted upon you; w^{ch} haueing tendred to y^r Lo^p
 and other Justices in theise parts I found them so well to approoue it
 (as y^t yo^r Lo^p will find) we haue followed y^t way w^{th} a ioynct
 consent; by w^{ch} meanes it appeears playnely y^t y^e prizes of y^e
 marketts are fallne and doe weekely fall, wheate being in diuerse
 Marketts where I haue attended this seruice at 7^s. y^e bushell and
 vi^s. vi^d. whare lately it was sold at 8^s. vi^d.; for y^e laborers
 and all y^e poorer sort being supplyed at home who are the greater
 nomber, the rates of graine must of necessytye fall to be less. My Lo.
 I feare I haue ben toe troublesom in this tedious discourse, but yo^r
 Lo^p knowes circumstances make y^e busines of no small consequence,
 w^{ch} it hath pleased his Ma^{ty} so gratiously to consider & yo^r
 Lo^{ps} so carefully to order, wharein if thare be any thing y^t yo^r
 Lo^p will be pleased to commaund me, I shall willing obaye, and so
 shall yo^r Lo^p euer find me deuoted to yo^r desyres in any thing,
 whareby I may becom seruiceable to y^e Countye, or to y^r Lo^p in
 particular, whose fauors have ingaged me to study how I may any way
 express myselfe most,

 [760] See note App. V.

    Hatf. Bro.                       Yo^r Lo^{ps} faithfull seruant

       10^r. 21, 1630.               Tho. Barrington.

 My wife w^{th} me offers yo^r Lo^p and yo^r noble La. obliged seruice
 thare being nothing we more desyre then to heear of yo^r good healthes.




APPENDIX XII.


Justices' reports on the execution of the Book of Orders of January,
1630/1[761].

[761] See p. 172 seq.

A. _Dom. State Papers_, Chas. I. Vol. 188. 85.

Questions sent by the justices responsible for the division of Fawley,
Hants. to the constables etc. of their district.

This copy of the inquiries was sent by Sir Richard Tychborne, Sir
Thomas Stukeley, Henry Clerke and William Rolfe, the justices
responsible for Fawley, to the High Sheriff of the county, together
with a report on the measures taken to improve poor relief in the
division of Fawley. The justices state they have sent these inquiries
to the "officers of everie parish," but have so far not obtained
satisfactory replies.

The document is directed "To the right wor^{ll} Thomas Cotele Esq. high
Sheriffe of the county of South(amp)ton."

[Sidenote: Southht.]

"The perticuler of such things as by vertue of divers statutes menconed
in his Ma^{t's} Commission are given in charge to the severall officers
vizt.

[Sidenote: Touching the poore.]

 1. What poore are releived that cannott worke.

 2. What poore are sett to worke that want it.

 3. What stocks are provided to sett the poore on worke.

 4. The names of such poore as want stocks to worke.

 5. The names of such men or women children that are above the age of
 10 yeres & not bound apprentice.

 6. The names of such householders as are fitt to take apprentices.

 7. What monies or lands have bine given to charitable vses.

 8. Whether the Churchwardens & overseers for theis things have mett
 monethly.

[Sidenote: Touching highwaies.]

 1. What high waies are in decay & need repaier w^{th}in yo^r parish.

 2. Whether the Churchwardens and Constables in Easter weeke last did
 chuse surveyo^{rs}.

 3. Whether they did appoint 6 daies for worke and give notice thereof
 the next Sunday after.

 4. Whether everie man having a plowe did for 6 daies and 8 houres in
 that day w^{th} twoe men and necessarie tooles worke in those daies.

 5. Whether everie person not being an hired serv^t or taking wages
 have wrought those 6 daies.

 6. What defects in any persons have bine presented by the Surveyo^{rs}
 to the Justices.

 7. Whether any nusance by anie neighbors to anie high waies be
 comitted.

[Sidenote: Touching laborers & s(er)v^{ts}.[762]]

[762] All these inquiries refer to the statute of Elizabeth concerning
labourers (5 Eliz. c. 4) or to the clause in the poor law of 1601 (43
Eliz. c. 2) which ordered the overseers to set to work all persons who
had no means to maintain themselves. See above, pp. 140, 161. Some of
the regulations of the former statute provide that in many employments
servants should not be retained for less than a year; that the rates
of wages should be fixed by the justices in Quarter Sessions every
year; that a quarter's warning should be given if either master or
servant desired to terminate the engagement at the end of the term, and
that a testimonial should be obtained by a servant before he left his
own parish or town, and should be shown to his new master before he
obtained a fresh engagement. The statute also settled the conditions
of apprenticeship, and limited the right of becoming an apprentice in
certain crafts to the sons of those who possessed a little property. It
also provided that all persons between twelve and sixty not otherwise
employed, might be compelled to serve in husbandry. Several other
references to the execution of this statute occur in the reports here
printed. See B., Westmill and Sawbridgeworth, also D and E.

 1. Whether those in the parish w^{ch} are fitt to serve doe serve.

 2. Whether anie be retained or doe serve for lesse then a yeare.

 3. Whether any doe give or take wage other then the Statute allowes.

 4. Whether any departe att the end of theire terme w^{th}out a
 q(uar)ters warninge.

 5. Whether any doe serve or be retained w^{th}out first shewing a
 testimoniall.

 6. Whether any refuse to serve either as apprentice or otherwise
 w^{ch} ought to serve.

[Sidenote: Touching Rogues.]

                                     { All beggers.
  1. All wanderers are rogues viz^t. { Patent gatherers.
                                     { Collecto^{rs} for persons.
                                     { Proctors.

                                   { Juglers.
  2. All using vnlawfull trades as { Plaiers.
                                   { Fortune tellers.
                                   { Egiptians.

                                            { Minstrells.
                                            { Bearewards.
  3. Idle traders travelling ag^t the lawe. { Tynkers.
                                            { Pedlers.
                                            { Pettichapmen.
                                            { Glasmen.

 1. To present w^{ch} of theis or what other persons have bine
 apprehended or punished either by private persons or officers.

 2. Whoe have neglected to punish anie such Rogues.

 3. Whoe have releived or lodged them.

[Sidenote: Touching Alehouses.]

 1. What alehouses there be in yo^r parish & where they stand.

 2. What persons they bee that keepe them & whether licensed or bound.

 3. What assize of bread & beere they keepe.

 4. What disorders they keepe in theire houses by drinking or otherwise.

 5. What persons haunt the same Alehouses or continue drinking therein.

 6. What persons have bine drunke and have not bine therefore punished.

[Sidenote: Lastly.]

 Whether the watches appointed by the Statute have bine duly observed
 for the apprehencon and punishm^t of Rogues."


B. _Dom. State Papers_, Chas. I. Vol. 189. 80 and Vol. 197. 69.
Extracts from two reports from the hundred of Braughing, one sent to
the High Sheriff in April and the other in Sept. 1631.

These two reports contain abstracts of the returns sent in by the
overseers at six monthly meetings held between Feb. 7th, 1630/1 and
June 27th, 1631[763]. The whole of the abstracts sent in on Feb.
7th are here printed, but of the others only those which indicate
improvement in the administration of the poor law. The first document
is written on parchment, the second on paper, both in a clerk's hand.

[763] See above, p. 249.

 =Hertf.=[764]

 [764] In the manuscript the names of the churchwardens &c. are written
 opposite the entries in a right-hand margin and the names of the
 places are written in a large hand in a left-hand margin.

 "An Abstract of the Returne and presentments made by the
 Churchwardens, Constables and Ouerseers for the poore in the parishes
 of the halfe Hundred of +Braughinge+ vnto vs Justices of the
 peace in this devision whose names are herevnder written, on the
 vii^{th} of February 1630.

 =Braughinge=[765].

 [765] Of these places only Ware, Stortford, Sawbridgeworth, Braughing
 and Stansted Abbots are of any size; Eastwick has even now only 71
 inhabitants, and neither Gilston, Westmill or Thundridge have a
 population exceeding 500. The population of Charles I.'s time for the
 whole of England and Wales is estimated to have been about one-sixth
 that of the present day. The largest place, Ware, has a stock when
 the reports begin, the second in size, Stortford, reports one at the
 second meeting, while the overseers of Braughing have arranged for the
 employment of the poor in another manner. Here therefore as elsewhere
 arrangements for finding work exist more in the larger places than in
 the smaller.

 Noe stocke for the poore, noe land or rents for charitable vses. A
 dozen of bread out of Lent and ii dozen in Lent w^{th} a barrell of
 white and a cade of red herrings. Noe children put to seruice this
 yeare, foure to be put out, six rogues punished, fiftie shillings
 guift to the poore.

      Edward Dogood, Henry Watts, _Churchwardens_.
      Thomas Smith, _Ouerseer for the poore_.

 =Widford.=

 Noe stocke, but foure pounds yearely gathered, and fiue markes rent,
 none that want worke, none put to seruice, one to put forth. Prouision
 of corne at iii^s iiii^d for the poore.

      Oliuer Mills, _Churchwarden_.
      Thomas Hadsley, _Ouerseer for the poore_.

 =Eastwicke.=

 Noe stocke for the poore, noe children to put to service, noe disorder
 in Alehouses, Watches and Ward duely kept, iii rogues punished, xxx^s
 yearly rent for the poore.

      Thomas Kinge, George Cramphorne, _Constables_.
      John Thorogood, _Ouerseer for the poore_.

 =Stansted Abbot.=

 Noe stocke but twoe cowes[766] and xviii^s iiij^d yearely rent. One
 lately put to seruice one to be put fourth, noe disorder in the Innes
 or Alehouses, eleuen rogues punished.

 [766] The keeping of cows so that the poor could have their milk seems
 to have been one of the oldest methods of public poor relief; see
 Ashley, _Econ. Hist._, II. p. 311.

      John Tayler, _Constable_.
      Abraham Grisley, _Churchwarden_.
      John Bannester, _Ouerseer for the poore_.

 =Ware.=

 Thirtie pounds stocke to sett the poore one worke; three lately put
 to seruice, nine more male and female to put forth; rents yearely
 imployed according to the donors wills; fortie markes, 80^{li} yearely
 collection by Rates for the poore, more levied since Michaellmas
 last; 93^{li} to buy corne for the poore and sold them at iiii^s. the
 bushell, more 26^{li} giuen at Christmas by the Inhabitants in money
 to the poore; Watch and Ward duely kept, xiii rogues punished and
 passed, none but will worke for reasonable pay, three drawe Beare and
 sell w^{th}out Licence, noe disorders in Innes or Alehouses but such
 as haue lately been punished.

      Robert Dowell, Isacke Needham, _Constables_.
      Humphrie Parker, Thomas Mead, _Churchwardens_.
      Joseph Wattson, Thomas Hadsley, _Ouerseers_.

 =Chorley.=

 Noe stocke, twoe put to service, noe rents for charitable vses, no
 vnlicenced Alehouses, 24 Quarters of corne provided for the poore and
 sold to them at iii_s._ iiii_d._ the bushell.

      Nicholas Humfrie, _Churchwarden_.
      Richard Godfree, _Constable_.
      Edward Sabine, _Ouerseer_.

=Gildston.=

 Noe stocke, The poore imployed by clothiers, one childe put to seruice
 the others twoe young, 5^{li} yearely Rent for the poore, but one
 Alehouse noe disorder therein, Watches and Wards duely kept.

      Nathaniell Spencer, _Constable_.
      John Rogers, _Churchwarden_.
      Henry Corney, _Ouerseer_.

=Hunsdon.=

 Tenn pounds Stocke to sett the poore on Worke, none to be put out,
 10^{li} Land for charitable vses; noe unlicenced Alehouses; noe
 disorder in any, Watch and Ward duely kept, Rogues punished by the
 Marshall.

      George Elliott, Richard Hunt, _Const._
      Thomas Howe, _Churchwarden_.

=Westmill.=

 Noe stocke for the poore, xvii rogues punished & passed, Richard Beadle
 and John Boldle liue idly[767], one boy put to seruice, one other to
 put fourth, neither Inne nor alehouse.

[767] See above, pp. 156-7 note.

      Richard Haruey, _Const._
      Thomas Kirby, _Churchwar._
      John Bullard, _Ouerseer_.

=Sabridgworth.=

 Noe stocke to sett the Poore on worke, a stocke of corne at iii_s._ and
 iiii_d._ the bushell for the poore, none put to seruice, many to be put
 forth, the profits to the poore imployed as by the doners wills, noe
 unlicenced alehouses, noe disorder in licenced, none liue idly, Watch
 and Ward duely kept, Rogues punished and passed according to the lawe;
 Levied vpon drunkards x_s._ w^{ch} was giuen to the poore.

      William Addams, _Churchwarden_.
      Richard Shepheard, _Constable_.
      Simon Abbott, _Ouerseer for the poore_.

=Standon.=

 Noe stock for the poore, watch and ward duely kept, xii rogues
 punished and passed, none liue idly, fiue children put out to seruice,
 viii male & ix female children to put fourth, noe vnlicenced Alehouses
 nor disorder in any, noe money Levied vpon drunkards, 50^{li} per
 annu(m) rents imployed according to the donors intent.

      William Beadle, _Churchwarden_.
      Richard Hill, _Constable_.
      Thomas (Avorch?), _Ouerseer for y^e poore_.

 =Stortford.=

 Twentie foure pounds & tenn shillings collected yearly for the poore
 xii^{li}: xi^s rents, xxiij^{li}: x^s laid out to buy corne for
 the poore at xvi^d the bushell cheaper then it cost, not any put
 to seruice this yeare, viii children to be put out, noe vnlicenced
 alehouses, noe disorder in Inne or Alehouse, foure vagrants punished,
 Watch and Warde duely kept, not any idle persons.

      Leonard Knight, _Constable_.
      John Jones, _Ouerseer for y^e poore_.

 =Thundridge.=

 Noe stocke for their poore, watches and wards duely kept, none put to
 seruice this yeare, Henry Cobham selleth Beare w^{th}out Licence noe
 disorder in Innes or Alehouses, noe money levied upon drunkards. The
 rest of the presentment is against Edward Gardiner Esq. w^{ch} doth
 depend vpon the Lawe.

      Frier Durden, _Churchwarden_.
      Thomas Young, _Consta^{ble}_.
      Isacke Gray, Thomas Gilson, _Ouerseers for the poore_."

This ends the returns for Feb. 7th; the same parishes send returns on
each of the later dates; the few which are here printed are those which
indicate the alteration effected by the enforcement of the Book of
Orders.

 "An Abstract of the Returnes made March the vii^{th}....

 =Sabrdgworth.=

 Noe vnlicenced Alehouses, noe disorder, watch and ward duely kept,
 vagrants punished according to the Lawe, x^s leuied vpon drunkards to
 the vse of the poore. Gabraell Whittawe, his wife, sonne and daughter
 liue idly and are hedgbreakers, noe stocke in the parish to sett the
 poore on worke. A greate stocke of corne laid in for the poore at
 iii^s iiij^d the bushell, none want worke, all being set one worke in
 the parish, ii^{li} x^s yearly rent distributed to the poore by the
 donors, xi boyes and girles to be put to service....

      Richard Shepheard, Robert Goulett, _Consta._
      Thomas Thackguere, William Addams, _Churchwar._
      Abraham Thorogood, Simon Abbott, _Ouerseers_....

 =Stortford.=

 Stocke to set the poore one worke to make Clothe 22^{li}: 10^s: of
 hempe, towe and flax; 24 children to put to seruice, 22 poore spinners
 sett to worke, none sell beare or ale w^{th}out licence, noe disorder
 in Innes or Alehouses, iiii rogues punished, watch & ward duely kept,
 noe Money leuied vpon drunkards since our last returne: Thomas Gurston
 goeth aboute w^{th} a Gunne or Peece, Tobias Chandler hath noe Lawfull
 calling.

      Tho. Barnard, gen. _Church._
      Leonard Knight, Robert Freeman, _Constables_.
      John Jones, James Scruby, _Ouerseers_.

 =Westmill.=

 Tenn pounds, thirteene shillings Stocke for the releife of the poore
 in corne; Richard Beadle, John Beadle idle liuers out of seruice, noe
 Inne or Alehouse in the parish, the Guifts formerly given imployed
 as by the donors wills, watch and ward duely kept, three rogues
 punished....

      Thomas Kirbey, Michaell More, _Churchwardens_.
      Tho. Ancell, Richard Haruey, _Ouerseers_.

 An Abstract of the Returnes made Aprill the iiii^{th} Anno d(omi)ni
 1631....

 =Braughinge.=

 Noe stock to sett the poore on worke but they are sett on worke by
 the inhabitants to spinn towe at iiii^d the pound, fiftie shillings
 guift to the poore, adozen of bread out of Lent and twoe dozen in
 Lent w^{th} a Barrell of White & a cade of Redd herrings the Weekly
 Collection amounteth to aboue xx^{li} the yeare, six rogues punished,
 Watches and Wardes duely kept....

      Will Denison, _Const._
      Hen. Wattie, Edw. Dogood, _Church._
      Tho. Smith, Edw. Tubman, _Ouer._

 =Widford.=

 None that keepe Alehouse w^{th}out Licence noe disorder in the
 Licenced, Watch and Ward duely kept, iiii rogues punished, noe money
 leuied vpon drunkards, none but will and doe worke for reasonable
 wages, noe stocke but the poore are releiued w^{th} corne and money,
 noe Guifts to charitable vses, none to put fourth Apprentices but
 those whome their parents will put fourth.

      Tho. Ouerill, _Const._
      Tho. Wett, _Churchw._
      John Cripes, _Ouers._


_D. S. P._ Chas. I. Vol. 197. 69.

 An Abstract of the Returnes and presentments made by the
 churchwardens, constables and ouerseers for the Poore in the parishes
 of the halfe hundred of Braughing vnto vs Justices of the peace in
 this diuision whose names are herevnder written on the first day of
 May anno do(min)i 1631....

 =Stortford.=

 Twoe put fourth Apprentices, there is more to put fourth soe soone as
 there cann be masters gotten for them, Robert Gray refuseth to pay to
 the Rate for the poore, there is one William Brookes will not keepe
 his seruice....

      James Scruby, John Jones, _Ouerseers_.
      John Bull, Robert Colt, _Churchwardens_.
      W^m Ellis, W^m Reade, _Constables_.

 An Abstract of the Returnes made May xxx^{th} 1631....

 =Gilston.=

 Noe unlicenced Alehouse keepers, Watch & Ward is duely kept, one Rogue
 punished and passed since the last Sitting, Joseph Charnocke and
 Thomas Charnocke liue idly and will not worke there is fiue pounds
 stocke and the poore are sett on worke, none put fourth apprentices as
 yet....

      Hen. Damyan, _Constable_.
      Robert Ellis, _Churchwarden_.
      Hen. Corney, _Ouerseer_....

 An Abstract of the Returnes made June xxvii^{th} anno do(min)i 1631....

 =Hunsdon.=

 None sell Ale or beare w^{th}out Licence, Watch and Ward is duely
 kept, tenn Rogues haue been punished and passed, noe money leuied vpon
 drunkards, noe idle persons, theire was a stocke of Tenn pounds to
 sett the poore on worke, w^{ch} is decayed and come to fiue pounds,
 Noe guifts to charitable vses, none fitt to put apprentices....

      George Elliott, _Constable_.
      John Burton, _Churchwarden_.
      W^m Hale, _Ouerseer_.

 =Eastwicke.=

 Watch and Ward is duely kept, noe unlicenced alehouses, noe rogues
 punished since the last sitting, the poore are sett on worke by
 the inhabitants, there are some yearely rents w^{ch} are weekely
 distributed to the poore, none to put fourth apprentices."

      Tho. King, _Constable_.
      Geo. Cramphorne, _Churchwarden_.
      Tho. Porter, _Ouerseer_."

This later report is endorsed "Certifyed by the high Sheriff the first
of Septemb(er) 1631. Jo. Boteler."


C. _Dom. State Papers_, Chas. I. Vol. 190. 10.

Part of the Report of Bridewell.

This report of Bridewell seems to have been made in consequence of the
inquiries of the commissioners on poor relief appointed in Jan. 1630/1.

The estimated value of the labour of the inmates, the cost of their
maintenance, the amount paid in salaries to the officials of the
hospital all throw light on the rate of wages and on the cost of living
at this time.

 =London Bridewell.=

 "To the right hon^{ble} the lords of his Ma^{ties} most ho^{ble} privy
 Counsaile.

 We, the Presid^t, Treasurer and other the Governo^{rs} of the
 hospitall of Bridewell, in obedience to yo^r Lo(rdshi)ps order dated
 the xviii^{th} day of Aprill now last past doe humbly present vnto
 Hono^{rs} a true particuler of all the state of the same Hospitall
 as it now standeth this Second day of May 1631 in manner and forme
 following (viz^t.)[768]." ...

 [768] Particulars of rents annually received are here set down; they
 together amount to £724. 2_s._ 2_d._

 "Casuall receipts."

  "There is raised by the labo^r of eu(er)y
  man that is set to worke w^{th}in the said hospitall
  for eu(er)y dayes worke iiii^d and for eu(er)y
  woman and boy ii^d, w^{ch} for vii yeares now last
  past co(mmun)ibus annis hath raised per
  ann(um)                                                  xl^{li}

      There hath been moreover receaved for the
  dyett of such rude apprentices and other idle
  and vnruly persons as have been sent thither
  w^{th}in Seaven yeares last past co(mmun)ibus
  annis per ann(um)                                        xxxvi^{li}

      There hath been given by well disposed
  persons towards the releife of the poore people
  harboured w^{th}in the said hospitall and towards
  the putting forth of poore children apprentices
  w^{th}in the space of vii yeares last past co(mmun)ibus
  annis the yearly som(m)e of                              cxx^{li}

      Som(m)e of all the Casuall receipts yearly ys        clxxxxvi^{li}

      There hath been letten w^{th}in the space of
  Seaven yeares of the lands and Tenem^{ts} belonging
  to the said Hospitall fifteene leases
  for the w^{ch} there hath been receaved in fines
  the totall som(m)e of Three hundred & fifteene
  pounds w^{ch} co(mmun)ibus annis doth amount
  vnto the yearly some of                                  xlv^{li}

                                                In toto    ccxli^{li}

      There is also belonging to the said hospitall
  one lease of fifteene Tenem^{ts} at Bethlem w^{th}out
  Bishopsgate London w^{ch} cost cccl^{li} wherein are
  yet to come v yeares at o^r Lady day last
  whervpon is to be receaved the cleare yearly
  rent of                                          lx^{li}

      Som(m)e totall of all the rents revenue
  and receipts aforemenconed ys                    mxxv^{li}, ii^s, ii^d

      There is remaining in stock belonging to
  the said Hospitall these severall som(m)es
  he(re)after menconed (viz^t)

      There remaineth vpon the foote of the
  account of the Tre(asure)r of the said hospitall
  made vp at Xpimas 1630 the som(m)e of            ccccv^{li} vii^s ii^d

      There is also remaining in stock belonging
  to the said hospitall by the guift of Mr Richard
  Culverwell dec. the somme of                     cc

      There is also remaining in stock of the
  guift of M^{ris} Mary Paradyne Widdow the
  som(m)e of                                       cc^{li}

  For the ymploym^t of the said last recited som(m)es of Two hundred
  pounds a peice, the Citty have given bonds that the same shall remaine
  and foreu(er) continue as a stock in the said Hospitall and that the
  benefitt thereof made shall redound to the putting forth of poore
  children apprentices and otherwise to releive the poore of the same
  hospitall in such sort and to such vses as the dono^{rs} thereof have
  limitted. The same to be disposed by the discrecon of the Governo^{rs}
  of the same Hospitall.

      And whereas the said house was indebted
  to the chamber of London the som(m)e of 200^{li}
  and did otherwise want stock to releive the
  poore and set them to worke, there was therfore
  a colleccon made w^{th}in the Citty of London
  by order of Lord Maio^r and Court of Ald(e)r(me)n
  about Seaven yeares now past for and
  towards the releife of the poore harboured in
  the said Hospitall and towards the mainteining
  of a stock there to set the poore on worke and
  otherwise to put poore children out apprentices
  to the totall som(m)e of 1749^{li}. 5^s. 3^d, parte
  whereof (viz^t) 200^{li} was paid into the chamber
  of London to satisfy the debt aforesaid and
  350^{li} more was laid out for the purchase of the
  lease aforemenconed at Bethlem and the residue
  is remaining yet in stock to buy hempe or
  otherwise to be disposed of in such sort for
  vse of the house as the Govern^{ors} of the said
  house shall best advise (that is to say)           mclxxxxix^{li} v^s iii^d

      Som(m)e totall of all the stock aforemenconed
  ys                                                 mmiiij^{li} xii^s v^d

      There is furthermore to be receaved for
  fines of leases vpon bonds and other security
  not yet due to be paid                             cclxxx^{li}

      There ys also due to the said Hospitall by
  bonds the som(m)e of                               cxi^{li}

      And there is more also due to the said
  Hospitall in doubtfull or desperate debts the
  som(m)e of                                         cxxxiiij^{li}

      Som(m)e totall of all the said debts ys        v^cxv^{li}[769]

 [769] The arithmetic seems wrong here; it should be £525.

 There ys no Linnen bedding or ymplemts of houshold stuffe belonging
 to the said Hospitall other then such as are hereafter menconed in a
 particuler Inventary thereof made and here vnto annexed.

 There are vsed w^{th}in the said Hospitall these occupacons or workes
 hereafter menconed (viz^t).

 Four Silkeweavers who doe keepe poore children taken vp in the streets
 or otherwise distressed as their apprentices to the number of fortye &
 sixe.

 Two Pinmakers who doe likewise keepe as apprentices twenty and three.

 One Ribbon weaver who keepeth v apprentices.

 Two Hempdressers who keepe Tenn apprentices.

 Five Glovers who keepe Sixteene apprentices.

 One Linnen Weav(er) who keepeth iiij^r apprentices.

 One Carpenter who keepeth Two apprentices.

  The whole number of the apprentices are cvi.

  The Hempmen aforesaid doe at this time keepe at worke in beating hempe
  of men and women to the number of xlviii.

  There are also kept at this present w^{th}in the said Hospitall of
  vagrants and persons vnable to worke to the number of xiij.

  There are also w^{th}in the said Hospitall these seu(er)all officers
  hereafter menconed.

  A Preacher who hath for his yearly wages
  and house rent                                    xxvi^{li} xvi^s viii^d

  A Clarke to keepe their bookes and to
  enter vp their accounts who hath yearly for
  his sallary                                       xx^{li}

  A Steward who for himselfe his man and
  his maid receaveth yearly                         xxxii^{li}

  A Porter who receaveth yearly for himselfe
  and his man                                       xxij^{li} xvj^s viii^d

  A Matron who receaveth yearly for herselfe
  and her maid                                      xxv^{li}

  One Beadle who is also Sexton of the Chappell
  and receaveth yearly for his service therein
  and for making cleane the yards and looking
  to themptying of the vaults Three pounds Sixe
  shillings and Eight pence And he being a
  Tailo^r is allowed yearly towards making the
  apprentices and others of the poores clothes
  w^{th}in the house iiii^{li} and he is allowed more
  yearly xx^s in tot.                               viii^{li} vi^s viii^d

  One other Beadle who receaveth yearly         xx^s

  These two Beadles receave the rest of their
  wages from the other Hospitalls.

  Two other beadles who receave yearly for
  wages and livery coats                            xiij^{li} iiij^s

  These officers doe all reside w^{th}in the house.

  A Surgeon to view the bodies of such as
  are brought in diseased or lame w^{th}in the
  house and to cure such as be suddenly hurt
  who receaveth yearly                              xl^s

  There are also Two Marshalls men who
  doe receive yearly for their wages                xxxvi^{li} x^s

  There is a Raker to carry away the soyle
  from the house who hath yearly                    xx^s


  A Nightman to empty the Vaults who hath
  yearly                                            iiij^{li}

  Som(m)e totall of all the officers wages ys   clxxxxiij^{li} viii^s[770]

  [770] The sum total seems to amount to £192. 14_s._

  The Revenue of the said Hospitall is expended
  and disposed of in releiveing and
  manteining such aged lame sick and idle
  persons as are sent downe to the said Hospitall
  and either cannot or will not worke for
  whome they are constrained to provide clothes
  for such as be naked, diet, straw and other
  provision, and also to allowe continuall sustenance
  to those whose worke is not sufficient
  to releive them, all w^{ch} w^{th}in the space of
  vii yeares last past one yeare w^{th} another hath
  expended per ann(um)                              ccxl^{li}

  And also, according to the intent and true
  meaning of their grant, there are mainteined in
  clothes w^{th}in the said hospitall one hundred
  and sixe apprentices, poore children most of
  them taken out of the streets whose Masters
  dwell rent free w^{th}in the said Hospitall, besides
  many other poore children are put forth apprentices
  into other places. All w^{ch} together
  w^{th} the repaire of the houses and other necessary
  charges and expences of the said hospitall
  disbursed and laid out, as by the particulers
  thereof may appeare at large in the bookes
  of accounts, w^{th}in vii yeares last past hath
  cost one yeare w^{th} another at least            vii^{cli}

  Som(m)e totall of all the casuall paym^{ts}
  aforemenconed ys                                  ix^cxl^l

  Som(m)e totall of all the paym^{ts} afore specified
  ys                                                mcxxxiij^{li} viii^s[771]....

 [771] Particulars of the leases here follow, the rents of which amount
 to £483. 3_s._ 4_d._ After this there is an inventory of the furniture
 in every room of the hospital. The following are the particulars given
 for one of the rooms:

  "At the       Eight boarded bedsteds.
  working       One long table of Two planks.
  roome at      One forme and a particon.
  the Matrons.  One old forme.
                One old peice of timber lying before the chimney.
                Eight spinning wheeles.
                Three straw bedds and sixe bowlsters."

  The Ordinances and Constitucons by w^{ch} the said hospitall is
  ordered and governed are conteined and specified in great bookes by
  reason of the largenes whereof they cannot in so short a time be
  coppied out but they shalbe ready to be shewed forth as yo^r Hono^{rs}
  shall appoint."


D. _Dom. State Papers_, Chas. I., Vol. 191, No. 42. This report is
endorsed "16 May, 1631. Certificate from the Maior of Guldeforde in
Surr."

 [Sidenote: Guldeford in Com. Surr.]

 "The certificate of John Champion gent Maior of the Towne of
 Guldeford, on the behalf of the Maior and Justices of peace of the
 saide Towne and Lib(er)ties made the Sixtenth day of May, in the
 seauenth yere of the Raigne of o^r Sou(er)aigne Lord kinge Charles
 1631.

Accordinge to his Ma^{ties} good Orders and direccons, and in
performance of o^r Duties I certifie That forthw^{th} vppon receipt
of the Booke of instruccons w^{ch} was about the 5^t of Februarie
last past, we, the saide Maio^r and the Justices of Peace in the
saide Towne, did assemble o^rselues togeather and did call before
vs The constables, churchwardens and overseers of the poore in the
seu(er)all parishes w^{th}in the saide Towne and lib(er)ties. And ther
did enquire, As by the saide booke of Orders is directed, And haue
vntill this tyme contynewed a three weekes meetinge and made enquirie
accordinglie.

We found no neglect in any of the saide Officers, But that they haue
discharged ther duties accordinge to Lawe.

Vppon o^r enquirie had, seuerall presentm^{ts} were made to vs ag^t
dronkards and such as do sitt tiplinge and drinckinge in Alehouses
and vitlinge houses, and we haue caused the penalties lymitted by the
statute to be leuyed, as well on them as the vitlers and disposed the
same to y^e poore of the seu(er)all parishes wher the offences were
comitted as the Lawe requireth.

We haue caused also Two apprentices to be bound to handicrafts and
raysed money to place them And do prouide to haue such other as are
yet to be placed, to be put out so sone as they are fitt to be put out
We haue, at o^r Sessions of the peace helde for the saide Towne on
the second day of May last, enquired on those Articles that tend to
reformacon or punishm^t of Offences in Bakers or Brewers, Forstallers,
regrato^{rs} and ingrossers and of such other offences as are in the
direccon menc(ion)ed. And such Delinquents as stand presented before
vs and appered in Court we haue fyned and punished accordinge to Lawe.
And caused proces from the saide sessions to be made out against the
delinquents so presented and not appereinge, and entend to put the
seu(er)all Lawes in execucon against them.

Further we haue caused the statute of laborers to be putt in
execucon[772].

[772] See note to Appendix XII. A.

Item we haue ordered That the taxacons for the releife of the poore
are duely collected for their present releife. And touchinge the hable
poore men of the Towne both great and smale They are daielie imployed
and set on woorke, by the meanes of a good manufacture founded by the
right hono^{ble} the most Reuerend father in god, the Lord Archbishopp
of Canterbury his grace, in Guldeford, the stock beinge flaxe and
hempe, spining and weauing the same into cloth, w^{ch} we finde to be a
great comfort to many poore workefolke, men, women and children her.

We haue caused daylie ward in the Toune to be kept by sufficient
persons for the app(re)hencon of Rogues and Vagabonds and for safetie
and good order.

And we haue w^{th} all diligence and care taken order That the
constables and officers in the saide Towne haue vsed all diligence and
care in punishinge of Rogues and Vagabonds and that ther was few or no
Rogue taken for that by the late care and watch in the countrie and
Townes nere to tak Rogues, verie few or none are found to wander nor
any come to this Towne.

The number of Alehouses ar w^{th} all care lessened w^{th} vs and
the unlycensed punished and Brewers that haue s^rued them, and the
penalties disposed to the poore accordinge to lawe.

We haue taken speciall Care for the amending of highwaies w^{th}in the
lib(er)ties of the Towne and haue giuen the same in chardge to the
Surveyo^{rs} of the high waies to see it trulie performed

      16^{to} May Anno D(omin)i 1631.
      Jo. Champion _Maior_."


E. _Dom. State Papers_, Chas. I., Vol. 216, No. 45. This document is
endorsed "Cantebr(igia) July 1632, Certificate of y^e justices for
the hundreds of Chesterton, Papworth and North sto(we). Julii 16^o
1632."[773]

[773] See above, p. 264.

[Sidenote: Com(itatus) Cantebr(igiensis).]

"The c(er)tificate of S^r John Cutts, S^r Edward Hynde, S^r Robert
Hatton knights and Martin Peerce Esqr. Justices of the peace w^{th}in
the County of Cambridge aforesaid, and assigned to the devisions of
the hundreds of Chesterton, Papworth and North Stowe, vnto the high
Sheriffe of the said County, by vertue of certayne imprinted orders
and direccons sent from his ma^{tie}, and l(ett)res sent vnto vs by
the right hono^{ble} the lords of his ma^{ties} most hono^{ble} privy
Councell beareinge date the last day of Aprill Anno d(omi)ni 1632.

From o^r meeteinge at Longe Stanton the thirteenth of May 1632.

Wee, or some of vs whose names are heere subscribed, have mett
seu(er)all tymes for the said hund(reds) accordinge to the instruccons
sent vnto vs.

Wee have taken a strict accompt of the high Constables, petty
Constables, Churwardens and ou(er)seers for the poore of eu(er)y parish
w^{th}in theis hundreds howe the impotent poore are releived and their
other poore sett on worke in eu(er)y Towne, and we find that they are
sufficiently provided for and the Towne stockes we have in most Townes
increased w^{th} direccons to have them duly imployed.

Since our first meeteings we find the contry to have bin soe carefull
that wee have bin sloe in punishinge, but have rather sought by gentle
meanes to incourrage them, where we find the lawe to give vs that
liberty.

We have caused a gen(er)all privy Search to be made in all Townes
w^{th}in the sayd Hundreds, for the apprehendinge of rogues and
vagabons, and have caused them to be punished and conveyed accordinge
to the Statute, and we have comanded a strict and diligent ward to be
kept in eu(er)y Towne for the apprehendinge, punishinge and conveyinge
of all such Rogues and wandringe persons as shall hereafter be found
w^{th}in the said lymitts and we shall punish the defaults of such
officers as have bin negligent in the due execucon of the premisses.

We have at o^r seu(er)all meeteings put forth above one hundred and
fifty apprentices and have since taken an accompt of all such masters
as have heretofore taken apprentices and have putt them away, and we
have settled them againe w^{th} their said masters where they remayne
quietly.

For the statute of laborers, retayneinge of servants and orderinge of
wages, we have taken it into our consideracon, but have perfected
nothinge[774], the care of the poore and puttinge forth of apprentices
hath imployed soe much of our tyme.

[774] See note to Appendix XII. A.

The howes of correccon we have yett had noe tyme or means to alter but
we shall carefully and speedyly obey comandem^t.

For the highe wayes we have vsed our best diligence, and we have seene
the lawes strictly observed, but y^t must be a worke of tyme, and we
will continewe our care.

      Jhon Cutts. Edw. Hynde. Rob. Hatton. Martin Perse.
      Rec. this from y^e Justices
      Julii 16^o 1632."


F. _Dom. State Papers_, Chas. I., Vol. 226, No. 78.

Part of the certificate of the justices of Middlesex for the Finsbury
division.

The original document contains the accounts of six parishes[775] but
only the part relating to St Giles', Cripplegate, is here printed.

[775] The other five parishes are St Sepulchres, Stoke Newington,
Clarkenwell, Islington and Friern Barnet. A note is also added that

      "Hornsey and Finchley }
      have levyed           } nil."

The document is endorsed "Finsbury Division Midd. Certificate of
forfeitures[776] levyed of vnlycensed alehousekeeps for defective
measures, for the poore 1630, 1631 & 1632."

[776] See above, pp. 138, note 2, and 177. These forfeitures were
partially used for setting the poor to work in three of the parishes
out of these six.

 [Sidenote: St Gyles Cripplegate in Com. Midd.]

      "The constables and churchwardens there
  haue levyed of Alehousekeepers unlycensed
  and for defective measures in annis 1630, 1631
  & 1632, hucusque                                 lxxiiij^{li} xv^s

 [Sidenote: Francis Foster, Thomas Howgrave, John Willes,
 _Churchwardens_.]

      And that they have improved by the stocke
  disbursed                                        iij^{li} xii^s

      Whereof they have disbursed to poore
  people for stocke to sett them on worke          ix^{li} viii^s

      And for releife of those that were infected
  w^{th} the plague in y^e said parishe            iiij^{li} xviii^s

 [Sidenote: Apprentices put out, 19.]

      And for the puttinge forth and Clothinge
  nyneteene Apprentices                             xxxiii^{li} xviii^s

 [Sidenote: Rewards to informers.]

      And for rewardes to those that discovered
  the said forfeitures in y^e paryshe (for the vse
  of y^e poore?)                                    viii^{li} iii^s

 [Sidenote: Discretion.]

      And they haue disbursed to divers poore
  people accordinge to theire necessities by the
  discretion of the saide churchwardens             xvi^{li} xvii^s

      They have receaved                            lxxviii^{li} vii^s

      And haue disbursed                            lxxiii^{li} iiii^s iiii^d

 [Sidenote: Stocke remayninge.]

  And there remaynes in stocke for the vse
  of the poore of that parishe[777]                   v^{li} ii^s viii^d"

 [777] The whole series of accounts are signed by the justices Thomas
 Fowler, William Hudson and John Herne.


G. _Dom. State Papers_, Chas. I., Vol. 349, No. 86.

Part of the Certificate from the wappentake of Bassetlaw[778] 10th
March 1636/7.

[778] See above, p. 256 seq.

The following document is endorsed "Nott. 10th March 1636," in another
hand, while in the same hand as the rest of the document is written,
"The Divisions of North Clay, South Clay and Hatfeild w^{th}in the
wapentake of Bersett Law in the County of Nottingha(m)." The part of
the document here printed relates to the division of South Clay.

 "A Certificate of our proceedings at the Monethly meeteings held
 w^{th}in the Hundred of Bersett Law in the County of Nottingh(a)m
 since the last Assizes delivered to his Ma^{ties} Judges of Assize the
 tenth day of March Anno d(omi)ni 1636.

 At East Retford for the Divisions of South Clay and North Clay in
 October and Februarie 1636."

      "_Laneham_[779].

 [779] The following twenty-two places are all small except Tuxford,
 which now possesses nearly a thousand inhabitants. All the others
 except five have less than three hundred inhabitants at the present
 day.

 They certifie six poore people w^{ch} haue weeckely releife.

 It(em) that they haue in Towne stocke xvi^s w^{ch} is bestowed in hemp
 and imployed to sett such poore on worke as wante.

 It(em) that they haue had noe wanderers come w^{th}in their liberties.

 It(em) that they haue 4 poore children to bee placed out apprentices
 w^{ch} are to bee bound the next meeteing.


 _Ekring._

 Impr(imis) there is in that Towne and parishe 6 impotent and aged
 people w^{ch} haue weeckely pension.

 It(em) they haue in Towne stocke xx^s.

 It(em) they haue punished one vagrant.

 It(em) they haue placed foure poore children app(re)ntices.


 _Stokeham_[780].

 [780] Stokeham has now only thirty-five inhabitants, so this report
 does not necessarily denote negligence.

 Impr(imis) they haue in that Towne noe poore people but such as are
 able to maintaine themselues.

 It(em) wanderers they had none.


 _Gamolston._

 Impr(imis) they haue noe poore w^{ch} neede weeckely releife.

 It(em) they haue in Towne stocke 40^s to sett such poore on worke as
 neede.

 It(em) they haue noe poore children fitt as yett to bee putt
 apprentices.

 It(em) they haue punished 3 wanderers and sent the(m) into Yorkeshire
 where they sayed they were borne.


 _Ragnell._

 Inpr(imis) they maintayne 3 poore people w^{th} weeckely pension being
 aged.

 It(em) they haue in Towne stocke 3^{li} to sett such poore on worke as
 want worke.

 It(em) they haue noe poore children fitt to bee placed apprentices.

 It(em) wanderers they haue had none.


 _East Drayton._

 Impr(imis) they maintayne 5 poore people being impotent and aged
 w^{th} weeckely pension.

 It(em) they haue in Towne stocke 40^s to sett such other poore on
 worke as want worke.

 It(em) they haue noe poore children fitt to bee placed Apprentices.

 It(em) they haue punished 3 vagrants.


 _Darleton._

 Inpr(imis) they maintaine 2 poore people w^{th} weeckely pension.

 It(em) they haue 30^s in Towne stocke.

 It(em) they haue noe poore children fitt to bee placed apprentices.

 Item they haue punished 3 vagrants.


 _Rampton._

 Impr(imis) they maintaine one poore man w^{th} weeckely pension.

 It(em) they haue xx^{li} in Towne stocke.

 It(em) they haue placed out 2 Apprentices.

 Item they haue noe wanderers come w^{th}in their Towne.


 _Dunham._

 Impr(imis) they maintaine 4 poore people w^{th} monethly pension.

 It(em) they haue in Towne stocke 2^{li}. 6^s. 8^d.

 It(em) they haue noe poore children fitt to bee placed apprentices.

 It(em) wanderers they haue had none.


 _Askham._

 Impr(imis) they have 5 poore people w^{ch} haue weeckely pension.

 It(em) in Towne stocke twenty mks.

 It(em) they haue placed out one apprentice.

 It(em) they haue punished one vagrant.


 _Eaton._

 Inpr(imis) in Towne stocke 2^{li}. 6^s. 8^d.

 It(em) one poore boy placed out apprentice.

 It(em) two wanderers punished.


 _Kirton._

 Inpr(imis) 3 poore people w^{ch} haue weeckely or monethly releife, as
 they neede.

 It(em) in Towne stocke x^{li}.

 It(em) wanderers they haue had none.


 _Welhagh._

 Inpr(imis) in Towne stocke 6^{li}. 13^s. 4^d.

 It(em) wanderers they haue had none.

 It(em) poore children to bee placed out apprentices none.

 It(em) 4 poore people w^{ch} haue monethly releife.


 _Bilstrop._

 Impr(imis) they allowe a poore woman a weekely pension.

 It(em) they give for the keepinge of a bastard child per ann(um)
 xxxiii^s iiij^d.

 It(em) in towne stock 4 pounds.

 It(em) they haue punished 2 vagrants.


 _Tuxford._

 Impr(imis) they give to 9 poore people weekely pension.

 It(em) in towne stock five pounds.

 It(em) they haue placed out 6 poore children apprentice.

 It(em) they haue punished 3 vagrants.


 _East Markham._

 Impr(imis) in towne stock vij pounds.

 It(em) they haue placed out fower apprentice and w^{th} two of them
 given vii^{li} x^s.

 It(em) wanderers they haue had none.


 _Treswell._

 Impr(imis) the(y) releeve weekly of poore people, impotent, aged and
 younge children 29.

 It(em) they haue punished 3 vagrants.


 _Grove._

 Impr(imis) they haue no poore that need releefve all being able to
 mainteine themselues w^{th} theire labo^r.

 It(em) they haue no towne stock in regard theire poore are otherwise
 sett on worke.

 It(em) they haue no wanderers.


 _Egmonton._

 Imp(rimi)s they mainteine 8 poore people w^{th} weekly pension and one
 w^{th} monthly pension.

 It(em) towne stock they haue none because they imploy theire poore in
 other worke as they wante it.


 _Laxton cu(m) Morehouse._

 Inpr(imi)s they haue placed 3 poore children out apprentice and given
 w^{th} them vi^{li} x^s.

 It(em) they haue no towne stock, theire poore such as want work beinge
 sett on worke otherwise by the towne.

 It(em) wanderers they haue had none.


 _West Markham._

 Impr(imi)s they haue diuers younge children but are too young to place
 out apprentice w^{ch} wee maintaine and theire parents w^{th} worke.

 It(em) an old woman is mainteyned w^{th} a monethly pension of v^s
 iiij^d and a load of coles eu(er)y yeare.

 It(em) wanderers they haue had none.


 _Headon cu(m) Upton._

 Impr(imi)s they give vnto 3 poore people a weekly allowance.

 It(em) such poore as are able to worke are sett on worke.

 It(em) they haue placed out 4 apprentice.

 It(em) they haue punished 2 vagrants."

The reports for the divisions of North Clay and Hatfeild follow, and
the whole is signed by the justices.


H. _Dom. State Papers_, Chas. I., Vol. 395, No. 55.

Certificate concerning the Book of Orders from the hundreds of Loes,
Wilford, Thredling and Plomesgate, 14 July 1638[781].

[781] See above, p. 264.

 [Sidenote: Suff.]

 "To the high Sheriffe of the County of Suff.

 The Certificate of the Justices of the peace whose names are
 herevnd(er)written for the hundreds of Loes, Willford, Thredlinge
 and Plomesgate w^{th}in the lib(er)ty of S^{ct} Etheldred made the
 xiiii^{th} day of Julye: 1638, touchinge his Ma^{t's} Booke of Orders
 as followeth:

 1. First that wee doe contynue o^r monethly meeteings w^{th}in the
 said hundreds according to his Ma^{t's} said Booke of orders.

 2. That the impotent poore w^{th}in the said hundreds are releived
 and such other poore as are able to worke and will worke haveing noe
 stocks are provided of stocks and sett to worke by the ou(er)seers.

 3. That such idle poore as will nott worke are sent to the house of
 Correction and there sett to worke and punished according to lawe.

 4. That the nomber of sup(er)fluous alehowses w^{th}in the said
 hundreds doe still contynue suppressed.

 5. That since o^r last c(er)tificate wee haue bound forth syxe poore
 children to be apprentices.

 6. That since o^r last c(er)tificate wee haue levied w^{th}in the said
 hundreds for disorders in Innes and Alehowses and for other offences
 comitted contrary to lawe the some of Twenty shillings.

 7. That there hath bin a watch kept w^{th}in the said hundreds for the
 apprehending of Rogues and vagabonds in w^{ch} watch such Rogues as
 haue bin Apprehended haue bin punished and sent according to lawe.

      Edw^d Duke.
      Nic. Reuette."




APPENDIX XIII.


The assessment for a rate made at Norwich in Jan. 1642/3 in order to
relieve the poor and to raise a stock for setting them to work (Add.
MSS. Brit. Mus. No. 22619, f. 11).

The accounts for this rate are given in full for seven parishes of
Norwich, and a summary is also made of the accounts received from all
the parishes of the city. The whole sum together with contributions
from a few private gentlemen amounted to £105. 5_s._

The part of the account here printed relates to the parish of S.
Benedict. It is printed on a separate sheet of paper and is endorsed
"St Benedict's."

 "_St Benedict's._

                      _s._ _d._

  Ric. Puckle          02 : 8
  Edward Norris        02 : 0
  Daniell Stiles       01 : 4
  Will(ia)m Fearman    01 : 4
  Tho. Powle           01 : 4
  Henery Tompson       01 : 4
  Daniell Desermew     02 : 8
  Nathaniell Debony    02 : 0
  Nathaniel Depute     02 : 0
  Francis Gissell      02 : 0
  Will(ia)m Stratton   02 : 0
  John Whall           01 : 4

  Richard Puckle, Edw. Norris, _Churchwardens_.
  Henry Tompson, John Sabbarton, _Overseers_.

 The rate abouesaid made by vs the churchwardens and ou(er)seers of the
 said parishe whose names are aboue written for releiffe of the poore
 of o^r said parishe and for rayseinge a stocke to sett them on worke
 in theise necessitous times to be forth w^{th} paid at one payment
 this 3 day of January 1642.

 We haue perused the rate abouesaid and doe consent vnto ratefie and
 confirme the same and doe hereby require yo^u the said ou(er)seers
 forth w^{th} to collect the same and pay the same to M^r Adrian
 Parmenter Ald(erman) by the 14^{th} of this instant January to be
 imployed for the vse aforesaid this 4^{th} of January 1642.

      Will(ia)m Costlin, _Maio^r_.
      Adryan Pimenter.

    Rd. this 24^{th} of January } John Tolye
        In full of this byll    }  xxii^s."




APPENDIX XIV.

Report of the Four Royal Hospitals, 1644[782] (_King's pamphlets_, 669,
f. 10, No. 2).

[782] See above, p. 269. These reports were apparently issued every
year, and most of them between 1642 and 1649 are among the _King's
pamphlets_.


 A true Report of the great Costs and Charges of the foure Hospitals,
 in the City of London, in the maintenance of their great number of
 poore, this present yeare, 1644, as followeth:

  Children kept and maintained at this present, at the             }
  Charge of Christs Hospitall in the said House, in diverse        }  758
  places of this City and Suburbes, and with sundry Nurses         }
  in the Countrey.                                                 }

 The Names of all which are registred in the Bookes kept in Christs
 Hospitall, there to be seene from what Parishes, and by what meanes
 they have beene from time to time admitted.

  Children put forth Apprentices, discharged and dead                }
  this yeare last past                                               }  100

 In respect of the troubles of the times, the meanes of the said
 Hospitall hath very much failed for want of charitable Benevolences
 which formerly have beene given, and are now ceased and very few
 Legacies are now given to Hospitals, the Rents and Revenues thereunto
 belonging being also very ill paid; besides the want of bringing Cloth
 and other Manufactures to London, which have formerly bin brought to
 _Blackwell-Hall_, the Hallage whereof was a great part of the poore
 Childrens Maintenance, which being decaied, by these and other meanes,
 the said Hospitall hath not beene able to take in any Children for two
 yeares past.

  There hath bin Cured this yeare last past at the                   }
  Charge of _St. Bartholomewes_ Hospitall of maymed Souldiers        } 1122
  and other diseased Persons, to the number of                       }

 All which have beene relieved with Money and other necessaries at
 their departure.

  Buried this yeare after much Charge in their Sicknesse      } 152

  Remaining under Cure at this present, at the charge of      }
  the said Hospitall                                          }  249

  There hath bin Cured at the Charge of _St. Thomas_          }
  Hospitall this yeare last past, of diseased persons, wherof }
  a great number have bin Souldiers who have bin relieved     } 1063
  with money and other necessaries at their departure         }

  Buried this yeare after much charge in the time of          }
  their Sicknesse                                             }  248

  Remaining under Cure, upon the charge of the said           }
  Hospitall at this present                                   }  265

  There hath beene brought to the Hospitall of _Bridewell_    }
  within the space of one whole yeare last past, of Cavaleers } 1128
  and wandring Souldiers and other vagrant people, to the     }
  number of                                                   }

 Many whereof have beene very chargeable to the said Hospitall, for
 Apparrell, sicke dyet and Surgery, besides their ordinary dyet, and
 other provisions and charges expended about them, which could not be
 avoyded, by reason of their necessities. And there are now kept and
 maintained in Arts and Occupations, and other severall workes and
 labours at the charge of the said Hospitall, to the number of 134
 Apprentices and other Persons.

 The Hospitall of _Bethlem_ is of great antiquity, use and necessity
 for keeping and curing distracted persons who are of all other the
 most miserable, by reason of their wants, both for soule and body and
 have no sence thereof.

 That the charge thereof is very great, there being kept and maintained
 with Physick, dyet, and other reliefe, 44 distracted persons,
 constantly at least, and the rents and revenues thereof very small,
 not amounting to two third parts of the yearely charge and therefore
 is a fit object of Charity.

The date "Aprill 24^{th} 1644" is added in a contemporary hand with the
note that "this yeare ther was noe psalmes printed as usually."




APPENDIX XV.


Ordinance of the Lords for putting in execution the laws for the relief
of the poor[783] (_King's pamphlets_, Brit. Mus. 669, f. 9, No. 81).

[783] See above, p. 270.

This sheet is prefixed by the royal arms.

 Die Veneris 5 March 1646.

 The Lords in Parliament Assembled taking into their consideration
 the multitude of Beggars, poore, and Vagabonds in and about the
 Cities of _London_, _Westminster_ and in the other parts of this
 Kingdome; for prevention whereof, divers Acts of Parliament have
 been made, as well to punish such Beggars and Vagabonds, as also
 to provide for the reliefe of poore people, but by reason of the
 unhappy distractions of these times, the putting of the Lawes into
 Execution have been altogether neglected. It is therefore Ordered by
 the Lords in Parliament assembled, That the Lord Mayor of the City of
 _London_ for the time being, and all Judges and Justices of Assize
 and Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer and generall Goale delivery,
 in their severall Circuits, and Justices of Peace in their Quarter
 Sessions, and all other person or persons (who are by any Act of
 Parliament entrusted to see the said Acts put in Execution, and the
 poore to be provided for) doe strictly and carefully put in Execution
 all and severall the Acts of Parliament for the punishment of Beggers,
 Rogues, and Vagabonds and for releife of the poore. And the said
 Judges and Justices of Assize in their severall Circuits are required
 to give the said Acts of Parliament in charge at the Assizes in all
 the Countries where they shall come and keep Assize.

      _Joh. Brown Cler. Parliament._

      Printed at _London_ for _John Wright_ at the King's Head
      in the Old Baily 1646.




INDEX.


  abbey, new 28

  abbeys 3, 290, _see_ monasteries

  Abbot, Archbishop 157, 164, 211, 222, 258

  Aberdeen, boro. 280 n., 285, 286, 289;
    diocese of 287

  Abingdon 226, 260

  able-bodied poor, _see_ poor

  accounts of overseers of Alton 174
     "     of Bridewell 352 seq.
     "     of Gloucester 129, 130
     "     of overseers &c. of Finsbury division 360 seq.
     "     of Newcastle corporation 125
     "     of overseers, collectors, deacons, &c. of Norwich,
        102 n., 367
     "     of overseers in St Alban's district 182
     "     of overseers of St John's Walbrook 97
     "     of Sheffield corporation 225, 226
     "     of overseers of Staplegrove 327 seq.
     "     of Reading workhouse 113

  Acland, Sir John, charity of 216 n.

  Acts of Parliament, _see_ statutes

  actions legal, fees for 44

  Acton, J. and W., charities of 234 n.

  administration, _see_ execution of law

  Aelfric 3 n.

  Agbrigg 192 n., 255 n.

  aldermen, authority of, 134 n.
      "     of London 26, 30, 55, 95, 96, 305 seq.
      "     Court of 26, 30
      "     of Norwich 102 n., 104, 105, 106, 224 n.
      "     of Newcastle 124
      "     of Cambridge 44

  Aldrich, Allderiche, Aldriche, John 104, 308, 311 seq.

  Aldworth, Richard 212 n.

  Aldworth, Thomas 122, 222 n.

  alehouses, alehouse keepers, license of 117, 179, 332
      "      unlicensed 174, 346 seq.
      "      questions touching, 344
      "      misdemeanours in 175, 346 seq., 366, _see_ fines
      "      reduction and suppression of 145, 185 seq., 194 n., 252,
        325, 332, 358, 366
      "      regulation of 179, 180, 325, 331, 332, 346 seq.
      "      fines for unlicensed &c. 138 n., 360 seq., 366,
        _see_ Sunday

  Alfred, King 3

  All Saints', Hereford 211 n.

  allowance to poor brethren 42 n., _see_ pensions

  almoners, Gloucester 129 n.

  alms, _almes_, _almose_, _allmns_, _almesse_, _alyms_, 30, 35, 36,
        52, 54, 55, 102, 271
    "   increase beggars 40
    "   in Anglo-Saxon times 2 seq.
    "   at Southampton 9
    "   of great houses, 17 seq.
    "   distributed by parish priests, monks and guilds 6 seq.
    "   of Sir Julius Caesar, 295
    "   official collection of, 26, 55, 56, 57, 62, 63, 96, 278
    "   whether or not given to particular people in Norwich, 308 seq.
    "   in France 290
    "   _see_ charities, collections, contributions and giver,
        restraint of

  almsgiving, 66, _see_ alms

  almshouses, 8, 19, 27 n., 77, 101, 204, 207 seq.

  Alton 173, 176, 177 n., 186, 256 n.

  Alythwaite 214

  amendments 75 seq.

  America 230 n.

  Amesbury 50 n.

  Andersfield 194 n., 254 n., 261

  Andover 186, 298

  Anglo-Saxon times 2 seq.

  Antigua 230

  Applebye, William 217 n.

  Appleton in the Street 171 n.

  Appletree 151, 262 n., 299

  Appowell, charity of 233

  apprentices, statutory provisions touching 55, 56, 57, 76, 134 n.,
        138 n., 154, 155, 158, 179 n., 343 n.
       "       in Scotland 279, 279 n.
       "       poor children placed as 35 n., 117 n., 129, 167, 173,
        174, 175, 177, 180, 182, 183, 215 seq., 247, 248, 249, 250,
        251, 252, 253 seq., 299, 315, 328, 345 seq., 357, 359,
        361 seq., 366, 369
       "       in Bridewell 38, 217, 352, 353, 354, 356, 270
       "       opinion concerning 215 seq., 244, 295
       "       questions touching 247, 342, 344, _see_ charities

  archbishops, _see_ Canterbury and York

  aristocracy 296

  Arksey 168

  Armingford 82

  arms and armour 338, 339

  army, Parliamentary 274

  Arth, Henry 127 seq., 139, 168 n.

  _articles_ sent to justices 81
      "      " overseers 174, 181

  artificers 49, 228 n., 322, 323, _see_ labourers and lending cash

  Arundel 256

  Ashley, Prof. 20

  Ashton-under-Line 259

  Askham 257 n., 363

  assemblies, tumultuous 270

  Asser 3 n.

  assessments, cessments 116 seq., 167, 173 n., 180
       "       in London 29, 96
       "       in Cambridge 44
       "       in Norwich 104, 223 n., 367 seq.
       "       in North Riding 171, 171 n., 173
       "       in West Riding, 168
       "       voluntary 117, 129, _see_ rates

  assizes 179 n., 247 n., 299

  assize of bread and beer 176, 332, 344

  Atkinson, Thomas 176

  attorneys 44

  Athelstan, the Atheling 3 n.
      "      King 2 n.

  Atwill, charity of 222 n.

  Aucher, Richard 187 n.

  Audeley, Robert 265 n.

  Augsburg 20

  Axton 264 n.

  Aylesham 331


  Babergh 173 n., 187, 245

  _babis_ 280 n., 285

  Bacon, Lord 73, 74, 76, 79, 294

  Bacon, Nathaniel 316

  Badbury 256 n.

  badges for beggars 25, 26, 41, 280 n., 284 n., 285, 288 n.,
        _see_ beggars, tokens

  badgers 50 n., 87 seq., 188 n., 193, 316, 322, 323 seq., 340
     "    def. of 320

  Bagby 214 n.

  Bailey, Old 71 n.

  bailies, bailiffs 44, 57
     "     Scotch 279, 287 n.
     "     of Ipswich 42, 43, 115
     "     of Norwich Bridewell 104, 312
     "     of Lydd 178

  bairns 280

  baize, bays, bayes 152, 160, 225

  bakehouse 37

  bakers 124, 150, 176, 321, 332, 358

  Bakers 197 n.

  Bamme, Adam 23

  Banbury 185

  Banff 284

  banishment 77

  bankruptcies 148

  bar of House of Lords 76

  Barbados 229, 330

  Barbor, charity of 234 n.

  bark 85

  Barker, Andrew 215 n.

  Barking 83

  barley 179, 185 seq., 189 n.
    "    bread corne of poore, 145, _see_ corn

  Barnes, Sir George 31, 35

  Barnet 181, 182, 214 n., 258, _see_ Chipping Barnet and Friern Barnet

  Barnstaple, 121, 202, 202 n., 227, 230, 234

  Barnwell Gate 226

  barrack 27 n.

  Barrett, John, charity of 234

  Barrington, Sir Thomas 340, 341

  _baskitmaker_ 309

  Bastable 228 n.

  Bastardy 75

  Bassetlaw, report from 256 seq., 361 seq.

  Bath, Earl of, 121

  beadle, biddell, 34, 98, 355

  bearwards, _bearewards_ 68, 69, 70, 344

  Becontree 228 n.

  bedding, bedsteads, bedticks, 33, 260 n., 357 n.

  Bedford co. 89, 91 n.

  Bedford boro. 255, 261

  Bede 2

  beer 181, 198, 199, 207
    "  export forbidden 150
    "  price of 179, 331

  beggars, beggary 2, 11 seq., 31, 36, 38, 43, 54, 77, 81, 151, 167,
        169, 175, 242, 244, 295
     "     continental 13
     "     Scotch 278 seq., 287 seq.
     "     Irish 93
     "     sturdy and able-bodied, 4, 11 seq., 34, 56, 59, 99, 325,
        _see_ vagrants, rogues
     "     impotent, _see_ poor
     "     licensed or badged 20, 25, 26, 41, 42, 45, 53, 54, 58, 63,
        168, 279, 280 n., 284, 287 seq.
     "     movements restricted 5, _see_ settlement
     "     regulations of London 25 seq.
     "     number in Norwich 102
     "     punishment of 25, 79, 181, _see_ vagrants
     "     multitude of 11 seq., 280 n., 288
     "     declared rogues, 134, 344
     "     disappearance of 128, _see_ vagrants

  begging prohibited 58, 101, 104, 105, 106, 311

  Bell, Thomas 209

  _Belman_ 224

  benevolences 227 n., 269

  Bennett, Sir T., charity of 221 n.

  Bentley 168

  bequests, _see_ charities

  Bergholt 50

  Berkshire 48, 87 n., 192, 193, 196 n.

  Bethlehem, Bedlam 27 n., 28, 35, 38, 354, 370, _see_ hospitals, royal

  Beverley 210, 223, 255

  Bills 68 seq.
    "   of 1566 68
    "   of 1571 69
    "   of 1572 69
    "   new, of 1597 74 seq.
    "   for Houses of Correction 75 seq., 137
    "   new bill for rogues 76, 137

  bill of churchwardens 99

  billeting of poor 192, 214, 242, 251

  Bilstrop (Bilsthorpe) 364

  Birden, W., charity of 234 n.

  Bishops 58 n., 59 n., 86 n.
     "    exhortation of, 52, 57, 59
     "    appropriates tithe for poor 6 n.
     "    letter to 122
     "    inquire into breaches of trust 78, 136
     "    interrogatories of 58 n.

  Bishops Castle 263 n.

  Black Death 3
    "   Friars, House of 43

  Blackfriars 272

  Blackwell Hall 48, 369

  Blandford 253

  blind 55

  Blofield 228 n., 191 n.

  Bloise, Alice and Rose, charities of 234 n.

  Blue Coat School, _see_ Christ's Hospital

  Blundell, Alice, charity of 233

  Blythe, Dr 44

  Blything, hundred of 89 seq., 190 n.

  boarding out 202, 219, 369

  Bocardo 221 n.

  Bocking 152, 160, 161

  Bole 257 n.

  Boltby 171 n.

  Book of Orders, _see_ Orders

  book register 57 n.

  books of subscriptions, London 31

  "_Booke devised for the settinge of the poore on worke_" 93, 98 seq.

  _Booke for the Poore_, Norwich 102, 311 seq., _see_ _Maioris Bocke_

  _boote wrighte_ 309

  booth 44

  boroughs, _see_ towns

  Boscombe 50 n.

  Boteler, John 351

  Bountisborough 246

  Bowes 35, 111

  box, poor's 55, 58 n., 113, 288, 290

  boys 216, 216 n., 217 n.
    "  of St Giles' 198
    "  emigrant 230, _see_ children
    "  at school 218

  Bradford 186

  Brafferton, Thomas 111

  Braintree 152, 160, 161

  Bramber 256 n., 265 n., 298

  branding 138 n., 243

  Braughing, half hundred report on book of orders 248 seq., 256 n.,
        344 seq.
      "      corn sold under price 190 n., 191 n., 252, 263 n., 344 seq.

  Braughing town 345, 349

  bread 198, 199
     "  poor relieved with 90, 124, 192
     "  gifts of 207, 212, 212 n., 345, 349
     "  serving poor with 180, 181
     "  three sorts of 332, _see_ assize of bread

  brethren of St Cross 208 n.

  brewers 176, 321, 324, 331, 335, _see_ maltsters

  Bridewell 26 n., 31, 32, 33, 36 seq., 65, 69, 92 n., 98, 99, 100,
        217 seq., 229, 244 n., 269, 370
      "     London apprentices of 38, 217 seq., 235, 352, 353, 354, 356
      "     report of 351 seq.
      "     better sort in 37
      "     steward and officials of 37, 351, 355 seq.
      "     clerk of the work in 37
      "     value of labour in 352
      "     money given towards 352
      "     debts due to 354
      "     revenues of 356
      "     occupations in 33, 100, 217
      "     Norfolk 94
      "     Norwich House of Normans 101, 104, 311 seq., 314
      "     Bristol 114 n., _see_ hospitals royal and governors of,
        and also Correction Houses of

  Bridgwater 185 n., 157
      "      Earl of 156 n.

  bridges, charities for 136, 137 n.

  Bridport 193

  briefs for collections 203

  Brinklow 28, 30

  Bristol, Brestow 40, 86 n., 114, 121 n., 124, 150, 189, 209, 210,
        212, 213, 215 n., 219, 220, 222 n., 227
     "     scarcity measures 1594-7, 122 seq.
     "     pressure on employers at 231, lending cash

  Brittany 291

  Brixton 83, 256

  broggers 320

  buck sold under price 191 n.

  Buckingham co. 88 n., 193
      "      boro. 188, 256 n., 261, 265 n.

  Buckingham, Duke of 12, 19 n.

  Buckrose, 259 n.

  Buddlesgate 256 n.

  Budleigh, West 190 n.

  Bullington 82

  Bulmer 196 n.

  Bulmer, Henry de 8

  Buntingford 228, 228 n.

  Burgesses 42, _see_ towns

  Burghley, _see_ Cecil

  burial, paupers 180, 329

  Burneston 171 n.

  Burnham 245

  Burton's almshouse 210

  Bury 65, 113, 116, 157, 157 n., 163 n., 200

  bushel, varying size of 84 n., 187 n.

  butchers, fines of, 138 n., 175

  butter 51, 199

  buttons, making of 223, 309


  Caesar, John 296

  Caesar, Sir Julius 244, 295, 331

  Caistor, Sessions of, 88

  cakes 332

  Calais 48

  Cambridge co. 82, 162, 191 n., 192, 253 n., 263, 358 seq.
      "     boro. 43 seq., 45, 62, 64, 108, 200, 264
      "     new tenements in, 93
      "     workhouse at 226
      "     Mayor 174
      "     St Mary's church in 44
      "     reports from 174 seq., 176, 177 n.
      "     university of 93 n., 176

  Campbell, Lady 233

  Canninge, William 210

  Cannington 254 n., 261

  canons, _see_ Aelfric

  Canterbury 4, 41
      "      parishes of St Andrew, St George, St Michael 41
      "      work at 110
      "      see of 211

  Canterbury, Archbp. of 86 n., 101, 102, 122, 157, 211, 217

  caps 33

  captives, charities for 136

  Carberton (Carburton) 257 n.

  cards, carders, carding 33, 85, 260 n.

  Carew, Sir Ranulph 178

  Carhampton 245

  Caribee Isles, Lord of 230

  Carleton, letter to 145 n., 146

  Carlford 264 n.

  Carmarthen 151

  Carlisle, Earl of, 230

  carpenters 103, 218, 225, 354

  Carr, John 219

  carriers 138 n., 175

  carts, attacks on 196, 197 n.

  Cartmell 214

  Cashio 191 n., 255 n.

  Catherine, wife of Hen. VIII. 27

  cavaliers 370

  Cecil, Lord Burghley 31, 32, 68, 74, 75, 79, 81, 86, 93, 119 n.,
        146, 318, 334
    "    letter to 32, 126
    "    Sir Robert 130 n., 136 n.
    "    Sir Thomas 74

  census of poor, Norwich 103, 308 seq.

  certificate of punishment 54
       "      of observance of fasts &c. 122, _see_ reports

  Chamberlain 146 n.

  Chamberlain, the 8, 25

  Champion, Humphrey 212 n.

  Chancellor, Lord 78, 136
      "       of the Exchequer 157
      "       of University 70

  chantries, statute of 43

  chapmen, petty 70, 344

  charge to overseers 142, 180
     "   of Lord Chancellor 166

  charity, charities 7, 59, 61, 63, 86 n., 136, 137, 200, 204,
        210 seq., 259, 289, 295
     "     old methods of 17
     "     for providing work 222 seq., _see_ work
     "     for apprentices 215, 216
     "     for prisoners 220 seq., _see_ lending cash, endowments

  charitable uses 78, 248, 342, 345 seq.

  Charles I. 27 n., 16, 151, 153, 161, 163, 164, 172, 198, 295, 337
      "      justices of 292, 298, 304
      "      reign of 1, 21, 68, 198, 288
      "      personal government of 238, 241, 254

  Charles II., reign of 276

  Charter of University 176
     "    of St Cross 207

  Charterhouse 211

  cheese 199

  Cheeseman 112 n.

  Cheap, _Chepe_, _Cheape_, ward of 25, 305

  Cherbury 299 n.

  Chert, B., charity of 222 n.

  Cheshire 138 seq.
      "    constable of 139
      "    reports from 248

  chest, town 111, 201, 222, 280 n.

  Chester 8
     "    fair of 139
     "    Earl of 139
     "    castle at 248
     "    hospital at 271

  Chesterton 82 n., 264
      "      358 seq.

  Cheveley 82, 191 n.

  Chichester 228 n.

  children 31, 32, 34, 39, 43, 57, 64, 65 n., 76, 98, 99, 109, 113,
        117 n., 134, 135 n., 167, 167 n., 169 n., 175, 198, 215 seq.,
        226, 238, 294, 299, 369 seq.
     "     unapt for learning 33
     "     vagrant 82, 83
     "     apprenticing of, _see_ apprentices
     "     payments for 181
     "     emigrant 229
     "     in Norwich 103, 104, 105, 313 seq.
     "     in Wardrobe 272, 273
     "     Scotch 279, 281
     "     those overcharged with 127
     "     _see_ apprentices, Christ's Hospital, Bridewell, orphanages,
        schools

  Children's Hospital, _see_ St Giles' Norwich

  Chilford 192 n., 253 n., 256 n., 264 n.

  Chipping Barnet 181, 182, 214 n.

  Chipping Wycombe 188 n., 192 n., 193 seq.

  Chorley 346

  Christ's Church 28

  Christ's Hospital, London 26 n., 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 39, 40,
        216, 219, 269 seq., 369
          "          Treasurer of 97, 97 n., 99
          "          Ipswich, 43, 113, 117, 218, 269, 270
          "          guider of 113

  Christmas 1622 145, 146

  chroniclers of Bristol and Shrewsbury 123 seq.

  church, churches, every one to go to 58 n., 65, 100
     "    people called to 31, 306
     "    absence from, _see_ fines
     "    in London 28
     "    charities for repairing 136
     "    plate 41

  churchwardens, 44, 55, 56, 57, 59, 96, 122, 129, 154, 159, 167,
        169 n., 170 n., 171 n., 174, 175, 263 n., 305, 306, 360
        "        French 290
        "        accounts of 327
        "        inquiries made from 337
        "        returns of 345 seq.

  citizens of London 27 n., 34, 35, 64

  City of London, _see_ London

  Cirencester 82

  Civil War 113, 132, 150, 153, 198, 202, 231, 238, 266 seq., 270,
        274 seq., 301, 301 n., 302

  Clackclose 264 n.

  Clavering 190 n.

  Clay, North and South 361

  clergy, felony without 70

  Clerkenwell 264, 360 n.

  clerk in Bridewell 355

  cloth, _cloathing_, cloth trade 16, 138 n., 150, 152 seq.,
        160 seq., 173 n., 369
    "    crisis in trade 48 seq., 85 seq., 145, 147 seq., 152 seq.,
        230 seq., 245, 337 seq.
    "    poor employed to make 111, 182, 222, 223, 225, 358
    "    making at Bridewell 37 seq.
    "    length of 160
    "    vent of 145 n., 337
    "    unsold 152
    "    linen 117 n.

  clothiers, clothworkers, clothemen 37, 49, 85 seq., 147 seq.,
        160 seq., 173 n., 223, 255, 259, 336 seq., 358
      "      wages of workfolk 160 seq.
      "      pressure on employers, _see_ employers
      "      representative 148 n.
      "      money lent to 234, 235
      "      Gloucestershire 85, 115, 149
      "      Reading 231
      "      Ipswich 115

  clothing, gifts of 212 n.

  Clothworkers' Company 212

  Clugny, cells of 27 n.

  coal 199, _see_ fuel

  cobbler 308

  Cock, Christopher, charity of 234

  coin, coinage 16, 49, 50 n., 147

  Coke, Lord 74, 156 n., 157, 241, 243, 338

  Colchester 157, 157 n., 197 n.
      "      provision of work, and workhouse at 110, 113
      "      corn in 50, 185
      "      lending cash, charity in 235

  _colers_ of iron 25

  collections 55, 62, 229, 283, 290, 315
       "      in London 26, 29, 31, 96, 97
       "      in Lincoln 42 seq.
       "      for plague stricken 52, 200, 201
       "      for sufferers from fire 202

  collectors for the poor 130 n.
       "     Scotch 279
       "     for individuals 344

  colleges, French 290

  Colneis 264 n.

  commissions 84, 85 n., 144, 262 n.
       "      draft of 145 n., 243, 244, 342

  commissions of 1630/1 152, 156, 157, 240, 246, 252, 292
       "      local 157
       "      of charitable uses 248

  commissioners, 31, 50, 156, 157 seq., 159, 173, 253, 371, 351
        "        in Norwich 104, 106
        "        division of 157
        "        _for the Poore_ 156 note 2, note 3

  committees 156, 157, 280 n.
       "     of Council of State 273
       "     great 74, 76, 79
       "     for enclosures 74
       "     of Lords 75
       "     of eastern counties 275
       "     of Privy Council 148 n., 156, 156 n., 161

  Common Council 24, 28, 29, _see_ Journals and London

  Commons, House of 68 seq., 73 seq., 79, 293, 297

  Commonwealth 269 seq., 308

  communication, means of 84

  Companies, City 29, 30, 63, 97, 100, 212, 213, 233
      "      at St Albans 111, _see_ Ironmongers &c.

  _Complaynt of Roderyck Mors_ 7

  Comptroller, Mr 338

  conclusions 293 seq.

  Conningsby hospital 211 n.

  Conners 197 n.

  Connock, charity of 221 n.

  _Consforthe, Southe_ 308, 310

  constables 65, 95, 98, 99, 120, 159, 166, 171, 174, 175, 180, 181,
        182, 247, 273 n., 343, 360
      "      Scotch 282
      "      as collectors of revenue 268
      "      return of 345 seq.
      "      high 71, 170 n., 175, 317

  continent 20, 71, _see_ Europe

  contributions 45, 167, 202, 222, 285, 286 n., 289 n.
       "        deficient 97, 289 n.

  convention of Scottish boroughs 280, 285

  Cooper, John 227 n.

  Copley, Edw. 176

  corn 68, 83 seq., 204
    "   scarcity of, dearth of, in England 23 seq., 40 seq., 44,
        49 seq., 51, 61, 84 seq., 119 seq., 130 n., 144 seq., 149,
        150 seq., 163, 164, 172, 184 seq., 243, 245, 294, 316 seq.,
        318 seq., 338 seq., 344 seq.,
                                in Scotland 282, 286 seq.
    "   success of orders touching 89,192 seq.
    "   price of 84 seq., 119, 121 seq., 180, 191 n., 193, 194 seq.,
        301 n., 316, 341
    "   difficult to obtain 121, 125, 195 seq.
    "   price fixed 51, 88, 121
    "   transportation forbidden 144 n., 150
    "   stores of 23 seq., 40 seq., 50, 121 seq., 188 seq., 191 seq.,
        203, 340, 345, 346 seq.
    "   sold under price 89, 121 seq., 149, 187 seq., 193, 197 n., 249,
        323, 341
    "   sold at home 185, 187, 190 seq.
    "   surveys of 50, 87, 185, 186 seq., 193, 195, 317, 319 seq.,
        334 seq.
    "   gifts of 8, 204
    "   corn seized 85, 148 n.
    "   neglect to provide 124
    "   plentiful 192, 192 n., 203
    "   _see_ engrossers, badgers, orders and reports

  _corne busynes_ 166

  corn dealers 24, 85, _see_ badgers

  _corne maisters and mongers_ 128

  corn owners 88 n., 89, 195

  corner in wheat 195

  Cornwall 84, 130 n., 150, 187, 192 n., 196 n., 239, 258, 262 n., 266

  Corporation of the Poor 272, 273
       "      in Barnstaple 271

  corporations, _see_ town, rulers of

  correction by parents 99

  Correction, Houses of 36, 43, 66, 72, 75, 77, 79, 80, 113 seq., 126,
        130, 134 n., 136, 137, 140 seq., 158, 167, 170, 179 n., 217,
        221, 223, 225 seq., 241, 272, 294 seq., 325, 360, 366
       "      Scotch 281, 286
       "      at Arundel 228 n.,
                 Barnstaple 227 n.,
                 Bristol 114 n.,
                 Buntingford 228 n.,
                 Bury 113 seq.,
                 Cambridge 226,
                 Chester 248,
                 Chichester 228 n.,
                 Devonshire 227,
                 Devizes 229,
                 Essex 228 n.,
                 Gloucester 129, 227,
                 Hastings 228,
                 Herts 156 n.,
                 Ipswich _see_ Christ's Hospital,
                 Kendal 227 n.,
                 Liverpool 227 n.,
                 London, _see_ Bridewell,
                 Manchester 228,
                 Middlesex 156 n., 228, 264 n.,
                 Norfolk 228 n.,
                 Norwich 101, 107,
                 Nottingham 218, 227, 228,
                 Preston 228,
                 Reading 114,
                 Shepton Mallet 228 n.,
                 Stafford 274 n.,
                 Suffolk 228 n.,
                 Surrey 228,
                 Wakefield 128,
                 West Riding 168,
                 Winchester 118,
                 York 114

  Cosford 173 n., 245 n., 264 n.

  cost of living 34

  costs and charges of Royal Hospitals 369 seq.

  Cotele, Thomas 342

  cottages 57, 73, 125, 169, 169 n., 297

  Council of State 271, 273, 277
     "    of the North 80
     "    French 292
     "    _see_ Privy Council, Common Council

  counties, maritime 85, 85 n.
     "      home 85 n.
     "      clothmaking 145 n., 147
     "      officials of 179, 292, 294, _see_ justices, treasurer
     "      export from 150, 151
     "      to have a house of correction 137

  _Countrey Justice, The_ 139 seq.

  country employment in 231

  Court 146
    "   of Royal Hospitals 36
    "   Leet 158, _see_ Aldermen, Common Council

  Court books of Bridewell 38, 229 n.

  Cox, Edw. 215 n.

  Coxall 152

  cows for poor 346

  crafts 24, 37
    "    guilds of 210

  Crediton 190 n.

  Cromwell, Henry 87 n., 265 n.
     "      Oliver 87 n., 265 n.
     "      Thomas 18

  Crotch, Nathaniel 224 n.

  Croydon 211, 216, 222 n.

  Croyland 3

  Cuckney 257 n.

  Cumberland 239

  curate 305, 307

  curés 290

  _Curse of Corne horders_ 196


  Dacorum 190 n.

  Dalton, Michael 139 seq., 179 n.

  Danby, Edm., will of 136 n.
    "    Earl of 156 n.

  Danzig, Dansicke 124

  Darleton (Darlton) 363

  Dartford 264 n.

  deacon, deaconnes, Scotch 285 n.;
                     Norwich 102 n., 105, 106, 311 seq., 313;
    orders for 314

  dealers 50, 50 n., 84, 93, 193
     "    sell to poor under price 192, _see_ badgers

  Deane, Thos. 212 n.

  death, punishment of 57, 70, 71 n., 73, 77

  dearth of corn, _see_ corn

  debates 68 seq., 76, 294

  debtors 220, 221 n.

  decades, wages during successive 301 n.

  December, 1630, corn reports of 194

  decrepit and auld 280 n.

  Deepwade 191 n.

  Deerhurst 82

  denizens 152

  Denmark 124

  depopulation 158, _see_ enclosures

  Derby 188

  Description of England 12

  Devizes 228, 229

  Devon 84, 91 n., 93, 120, 148 n., 196, 213, 239, 241, 242, 258,
        259 n., 262 n., 266
    "   discontent in 155 n.
    "   corn in 187, 190
    "   justices of 155
    "   poor billeted 192
    "   prisoners of 220

  Dewsbury 169 n.

  diet for vagrants 99, 113 seq.
    "  for orphan boys 198
    "  wealthy to moderate 122

  dinner, _see_ St Giles, Bury, St Cross

  directions, _see_ orders

  discussions, _see_ debates

  disorder, disquiet 51, 61, 149, 196, 298, _see_ riots, insurrections,
        disturbances

  Diss 191 n.

  distress 49, 73, 126, 193, 294, 303
      "    in Scotland 286 seq.

  disturbances 51, 115, 125, 144, 145, 145 n.

  Dobbs, Sir Rich. 31

  Dodbrooke 196 n.

  doggerel 196, 197

  doles 18, 54, 55, 63

  Doncaster 169 n., 197 n., 256 n.

  Dorchester 82, 202
      "      Viscount 156 n., 157, 164, 340

  Dorset 84, 125, 148 n., 253

  draft of orders 86, 318 seq.

  drapery, new 225

  Drayton, East 362

  drum 126

  drunkards, drunkenness, _see_ fines

  dues 43, 44, 116 seq.

  Dumbarton 286 n.

  Dunham 363

  Dunmow 190 n., 194 n.

  Durham 127
    "    Bishop of 6 n.
    "    Dean of 125, 127
    "    bishopric of 239

  Dutch, Dutchman, Duchman 104 n., 110, 111, 200 n., 273

  Dutton, rights of lord of 138 seq.

  dyeing 33


  Eadgar, Archbp of York 3 n.

  Eakring 258 n., 362

  ear, boring through 70, 71 n., 73

  earnings, unstable 15, 295

  Earsham 191 n.

  Easby 214 n.

  eastern counties 153, 191, 192, 245, 265

  Eastwick 232 n., 249, 345 n., 346, 351

  Eaton 363

  ecclesiastics 2, 3

  edicts 290 seq.

  Edinburgh 279, 283

  Edisbury 262 n.

  education 18, 103, 105, 215 seq.

  Edw. II. 6 n.

  Edw. IV. 27 n.

  Edw. VI. 27 n., 33, 34, 36 n., 38, 209

  Edwinstree 190 n., 191 n., 193, 196 n., 228, 263 n., 296

  Egmonton 257 n., 364

  Egyptians, 127

  elders, 281, 284, 287 n.

  Elizabeth, Queen, 25, 80, 208, 209, 297
      "        "    hospital of, 219

  Elstree, Idlestrey 142 n., 181, 182, 214 n., 258

  Ely 3, 82

  emergency, relief in 184 seq., _see_ poor relief

  Emperor 48

  employers 100, 160 seq.
      "     pressed to keep men at work 48 seq., 85, 115 seq., 147,
        152 seq., 155, 223, 230 seq., 232
      "     losses of 148
      "     might compel service 141

  enclosures 73 seq., 125, 126, 144, 151

  endowments 269
      "      control of 3, 6 seq.
      "      misuse of 157
      "      old 207 seq., _see_ charities

  England 1, 48, 49, 70, 150, 183, 241, 242
     "    many die of want in 124

  engrossers, _ingrossers_ 50, 50 n., 73, 144 n., 176, 197 n., 296, 323,
        331, 332, 358

  Erpingham, South 218, 264 n., 331

  Essex 50, 83, 93, 149, 162, 190, 194 n., 255 n.
    "   justices of 153, 154, 336 seq.
    "   provision of work in 265 n.

  Ethelred, law of 3

  Etherington, Sir Rich. 170 n.

  Europe, Western 1, 13, 277, 293

  Ewecross 299 n.

  Exchequer Chamber 74

  execution of poor law and Book of Orders 97, 128, 129 seq., 143 seq.,
        150, 153, 158, 159, 174, 237 seq., 294
      "        "        improved 241 seq., 250 seq., 345
      "        "        negligence in 246 n., 247, 270 seq., 287, 371
      "        "        difficulty in 248
      "        "        machinery for 142 seq., 165 seq., 292
      "        "        in Scotland 279 seq., 286 seq.

  Exeter 9 n., 114, 150, 155, 157 n., 216 n., 219, 222 n.

  Exning 245, 334 seq.

  expulsion of poor, _see_ new comers

  Eynesford 218, 264 n., 331


  factors in making English poor relief 21 seq.

  Factory Acts 62

  Fairfax, Lord 177, 215, 259 n.

  fairs 8, 139, _see_ Stourbridge

  Falkland, Lord 156 n., 157, 164

  family, earning of 198
    "     as unit 300

  Farmanby 203

  farmers 203, _see_ markets

  Farringdon 192

  fasts, fast days 122, 252

  Fawley 186, 246, 247, 342

  _feaste of St John the Baptiste_ 308

  felon, felony 70, 71 n., 126, 221 n., 299

  felts 100

  fencers 69

  Fenner, Sir John 264 n.

  feudal system 14

  fiddlers 139

  Fielding, Basil 338

  fifteenths, _fiftene_, _fifteens_, _quinzièmes_ 29, 100, 116

  Finch, Mr 74

  Finchley 264 n., 360 n.

  Finger bread 332

  fines, forfeitures 4, 55, 117, 138 n., 174 seq.
    "    list of those assigned to poor 138 n.
    "    fines, for absence from church 58 n., 130 n., 138 n., 173 n.,
        174, 177
    "    of givers to beggars 105, 106, 311
    "    of deacons 315
    "    for bringing over poor immigrants 71
    "    for negligence 77
    "    for being drunk 138 n., 174, 177, 300, 344, 347, 348, 350,
        351, 357
    "    for swearing 138 n., 175, 177, _see_ Sunday, alehouse keepers

  Finsbury 360

  fire 202 seq.

  Fishborne, Rich., charity of 233

  fishing trade 273

  Fitz-Geffrie 196

  Fitzmary, Simon 27

  Flanders 48

  flax, stock of 72, 222, 225, 256, 272, 349, 358

  Fleet 163, 197 n.

  Flegg, East and West 191 n.

  Flendish 82, 191 n., 264 n.

  Fletcher of Saltoun 288

  Flint 192 n., 196 n.

  fluctuations in price 196
       "       in trade 232, _see_ trade

  food 194, 198
    "  lack of 85, 288, _see_ poor

  football 270

  Ford 299 n.

  Forehoe 191 n.

  foreigners, forainer 49, 117 n.

  forestaller, forestalling 50, 50 n., 73, 176, 296, 320, 332, 358

  forfeitures, _see_ fines

  fortune tellers 70, 344

  Fortunes of Nigel 216

  Foulness, Island of 135 n.

  Fox, almshouses of 210

  Foxton, Richard 176

  Framingham, Edw. 125

  Framloyde 85

  France 14, 48, 54, 110 n., 183, 267, 277, 279, 290 seq., 303

  Francis I. 290, 291

  fraud 269, 271

  Freebridge 264 n.

  freedom of town 44, 116, 117, 117 n.
     "    interference with 65

  Freemanors 245

  freemen 109, 116

  Freshwell 190 n.

  Freston 89

  Friern Barnet 264 n., 360 n.

  Friars 55
    "    churches of 28
    "    mendicant 55

  Fridays, fast on 122

  Friendly Societies 61

  Frome 263 n.

  Froxfield 173

  fuel 181, 199 bis, 315

  Fuller 295

  Fullers 37, 117 n., 147

  Fulsey, charity of 234 n.

  funds 4, 39 seq., 41, 43, 55, 56, 57, 59, 60, 62, 77, 107, 154, 167,
        177, 216, 273, 278, 290
    "   methods of raising 115 seq., 221 seq.
    "   insufficient 97
    "   misuse of 157
    "   parochial 213
    "   county 213
    "   Scotch 285 seq.
    "   Norwich 106
    "   Cambridge 44
    "   for Reading hospital 112 seq.

  funeral, beggars at 12

  Furness 214


  Games, unlawful 55, 69, 138 n., 173, 175, 177

  Gamolston, (Gamston) 362

  gaol, jaillies 241, 283, 299

  Gardiner, Dr. 295

  Gateshead 209

  Gaunt's hospital 219 n.

  gentlemen 211, 283, _see_ home

  Germany 13, 14, 277, 278, 293
     "    towns in 20 seq.

  gifts, voluntary 66, 72
    "    small 211

  Gilston 345 n., 347, 350

  girls, _see_ children

  giver, restraint of, 3, 25, 41, 54, 105, 106, 283, 311

  Glasgow 280 n., 286 n., 289

  Glassmen, glaziers 103, 138 n., 344

  Glastonbury 3

  Gloucester co. 82, 88, 115, 148 n., 149, 303
      "      boro. 45, 114, 129 seq., 150, 160 n., 163 n., 197 n.,
        213 n., 227, 262 n.
      "      hospitals at 129, 204, 208 seq.

  gloves, glovers 100, 224, 354

  Godalming 156

  _Goderynges dowghetyr_ 8

  Godolphin, Sir Francis 130 n.

  gold and silver thread 145 n.

  Goodwin, Thos. 234 n.

  government, subordinate 146

  governors, _see_ hospitals

  Gower, bequest of 19

  gowns, gifts for 212

  grandparents 134, 135 n.

  grain and granary, _see_ corn

  Grand Concern of England explained 275

  Grantham 201

  graziers 49

  Great Yarmouth 188, 189 n., 273

  Greenhoe, _Greenhoo_, South 88, 191 n., 263, 264 n., 317

  _Greevous Grones for the Poore_ 244

  Gresham, Sir Rich. 28 n.

  Grey Friars, _see_ Christ Church

  Grimshoe 88, 191 n., 263, 264 n.

  Grimsworth 186 n.

  Grindal, Archbp. 110, 211

  Grinton 171 n.

  Grove 257 n., 364

  guardians of the poor 141 n.

  Guildford 222, 357 seq.

  Guildford, Sir Henry 48

  Guildhall 23, 306, 307

  guilds 7, 42, 43 n., 210

  Guiltcross 88

  gun 349

  Gunthwaite 169 n.

  Gustavus Adolphus 264


  Haberdashers' Company 233

  habitations for poor 71, 75, 180, 214, _see_ cottages

  Haddington 283

  Hadleigh 149, 160 n.

  Hale, Sir Matthew 276

  Halesworth 189

  Hampden, John 193, 296

  Hampshire 48, 173, 186

  hand, living at his own 179 n.

  handbooks, legal 139 seq., 215

  _handemyll_ 35 n.

  Happing 191 n.

  Harbert, Sylva 160

  Harman 11 seq., 17, 288, 298

  Hartesmere 228 n., 264 n.

  harvests 49, 51, 141 n., 144, 149, 161, 164, 184 seq., 275

  Hastings, rape of 228, 261
     "      Sir Francis 74

  Hatfield, _Hadfeild_ 361

  havens 136, 137 n.

  Haward, John 119 n., 296 seq.

  Hawes, Sir James 93

  Hayridge co. Devon 228 n.

  Hayward, Sir Rowland 93

  Headon 365

  Heads of Houses 44

  hedgebreaker 174, 348

  Heiden House 272

  Hemlingford 87, 90

  hemp, stock of 72, 222, 225, 229, 232, 255 n., 256, 257 n., 272,
        349, 358

  hempdressers 218, 354

  hempmen 355

  Henderson, Mr 202 n.

  Henley 216

  Henry II. 207
    "   V. 27 n.
    "   VII.  policy of 14
    "    "    vagrant acts of 5
    "   VIII. 11, 15, 19, 21, 35, 47, 48, 54, 58, 278, 288, 291, 293
    "    "    hospitals refounded by 27 n., 28

  Henstead 191 n.

  Hereford co. 82, 192 n.
     "     boro. 8 n., 208, 211 seq., 216, 222, 260, 262 n.

  heritors 287

  herrings, gifts of 345, 349

  Hertford co. 93, 156 n., 186, 191, 225, 256, 345
     "     justices of 218, 220
     "     towns of 225
     "     population of 274, 275, _see_ Sessions, Jury

  Hertford, hundred of 191 n., 252, 256 n., 261
     "      boro. 163 n., 186
     "      fire at 202

  Hext, Edward 74, 76, 126 seq., 288, 298

  Heydon's charity 235 n.

  Highlands 14

  High Peak 298

  highwaymen 243

  highways 136, 247, 252, 358, 360

  Hitchen 190 n., 201, 201 n., 235, 263

  Hobson, workhouse of 226

  _hoill, theiffes_ 284

  Holland, Linc. 82, 226
     "     Earl of 157
     "     poor in 277
     "     refugees from 110 n.

  Holworthy, Rich. 221 n.

  home, order to return 120, 140, 144, 145 seq.

  Hopton, Arthur 89

  Horncastle 194, 264

  Hornsey 360 n.

  hosiers 231

  Hospitality 2, 7, 17 seq., 144, 145, _see_ alms

  hospitals 8, 19 seq., 39, 61, 75, 76, 77, 113, 169 n., 201, 204,
        207 seq., 220, 242, 277
      "      royal 34, 35, 36, 38, 59 n., 64, 269, 369 seq.
      "      in London 26 seq., 98, 157 n.
      "      town 45
      "      county 167, 170, 170 n.
      "      French 291
      "      Edw. VI.'s foundation 31
      "      governors of 35, 36 seq., 38, 64, 96, 100, 269, 352

  Houghton, Sir Robert 178

  House of the Poor 108, _see_ St Bartholomew's, London, and St Giles's,
        Norwich

  householder, poor 36, 187, 212, 225, 235

  housekeeping, laudable 146, _see_ hospitality

  houses 100, 181, 202 " regulation of 73, 100, 108, 297 n.,
        _see_ tenements
    "    provided for poor 214 n., 257 n., 287, 315, _see_ cottages,
        habitations

  Humber, counties south of 266

  Humbleyard 191 n.

  hundred 4, 54, 78, 151, 154, 159

  Hunsdon, 249, 347, 351

  Huntingdon 82 n., 87 n.
      "      Henry, Earl of 81

  Huntspill 254 n., 261

  Hurstington 265 n.

  husbandry, one brought up in 179 n., 259
      "      poor work at 224

  _husbondman_ 308


  idle, idlers 104, 174, 176, 228, 229, 299, 300, 347, 349, 350,
        _see_ vagrants, rogues, work

  _idoll to be gazed upon_ 166

  immigrants, pauper 71

  import of coal 199

  imprisonment 77

  indenture 28, 33, 217 n.

  indictments at Sessions 167 seq.

  indifferent 50, 50 n., 77

  individualist 300

  individuals 8, 300

  industry, national organisation of 302

  infants 227 n.

  informers, rewards to 361

  inhabitants 50, 50 n., 77, 134 n., 168, 169, 180
       "      of Paris 291
       "      of Knaresborough 167, 168
       "      employ poor 131, 232

  injunctions 58 n.

  inmates, lodgers 73, 169, 170 n.

  inn, vagrants at 12 seq.

  instructions to overseers 218

  insurrections 91, 91 n., 126, 127, 298, 303, 338

  interest 118, 233 seq.

  Interludes, enterludes 69

  interrogatories 58 n.

  Ipswich 42, 45 seq., 62, 108, 113, 117 seq., 129, 197 n., 218, 261,
        264, 293
     "    fair at 8
     "    new comers in 108
     "    provision for corn in 124 n.
     "    taxes for poor in 116, 117
     "    charities of 136 n., 233, 234

  Ireland 71, 150, 192 n.

  iron, stock of 72, 76

  iron works 33

  Ironmongers, Company of 37

  Ironside, charity of 234

  Isle of Man 71

  Isle of Wight 151

  Islington 210, 264 n., 360 n.

  Italy 89


  James I. 146, 209 n., 211, 301 n.

  January 1630/1, reports of 194

  Jenis, Mathias, charity of 222 n.

  Jersey school, Newark 204, 225

  Johnson, John, charity of 216 n.
     "     Richard, charity of, 234

  Journals of London 29 n., 305

  Judde, Lady 110

  judges 143, 149, 154, 159, 165, 166, 173, 178 seq., 183, 247 n.
    "    resolutions of 135 n., 141 n., 178, 179 n., 336
    "    advice of 178, 337
    "    decision of 276

  juglers 70, 344

  jurats 8

  Juries 87, 88 n., 319
    "    Grand 275

  Justice, Lord Chief 75

  justice of Somerset, _see_ Hext

  justices 41, 53, 59, 67, 70-94, 112, 119, 120 seq., 134 n., 158 seq.,
        171 seq., 179 n., 292, 298, 318 seq., 341
     "     powers and position of 165 seq.
     "     negligence of 143, 158, 197, 246
     "     reports of 151, 152, 181 seq., 192 seq., 245 seq., 274,
        316 seq., 326 seq., 331 seq., 340 seq., 342, 357 seq.
     "     letters to 143, 147 seq., 153, 162, 240 seq., 336, 338
     "     of Commonwealth 277
     "     Scotch 279 seq., 281 seq., 288, 290, 296
     "     Devon 112, 120, 148, 155
     "     Essex 149, 153, 162
     "     Wilts 121, 148
     "     Gloucestershire 148 seq.


  keeper of House of Correction 227 n.

  Keeper, Lord 119 seq., 338

  Kemp, charity of 235 n.

  Kendal 227

  Kendrick's charity 156, 157 n., 204

  Kent 48, 51, 148 n., 157, 191 n., 196 n., 264, 303

  Kentish street 100

  Kerry's hospital 211 n.

  Keylock's almshouses 213

  kidders, def. of 320

  Kilmerston 263 n.

  Kineburgh's Hospital 208

  King James' Hospital 208

  kings, Anglo-Saxon 2 seq.

  King's Bench 220

  Kingsclere 262 n.

  King's Council, _see_ Privy Council

  King's Lynn 113, 209, 224

  Kingston-upon-Hull 52

  Kington 90 n.

  Kirby, John 228 n.

  kirk officials 290

  kirk sessions 281, 283, 285 n., 286, 289 n.

  Kirklington 171 n.

  Kirton 257 n., 363

  Knapp, Augustine 212 n.

  Knaresborough, orders for 167, 168 seq.

  _knightes, younge_ 166

  knitting taught 299
      "    dames 332, _see_ school

  Knollys, Sir Francis 69


  labour, value of, in Bridewell 352

  labour-statutes, _see_ statutes

  labour yards 141 n.

  labourers 4, 17, 70, 180, 275, 309
      "     wages of 301, 343, _see_ statutes labour
      "     movements restricted 4 seq.
      "     casual 301
      "     standard of comfort of, 198 seq.
      "     supplied with corn 89, 185, 187, 192, 341, _see_ corn
      "     questions concerning 343, _see_ work

  labouring class, relief of 203 seq.

  Lackford 245, 334 seq.

  Lambeth 57 n.

  lame persons 7, 55

  Lamporte 327 n.

  Lancashire 192 n., 239, 251

  Lancaster 194 n.

  landlords 105, 108, 128, 169, 195, 203

  lands misapplied 78
    "   tax on 178
    "   for charities 345 seq.
    "   let by governors of Bridewell 352

  landwart parishes 280

  Laneham 257 n., 361

  _Lanterne_ 97

  Latimer 28, 64

  Laud 157, 164, 208, 211, 216, 216 n., 295

  Launceston 209, 221 n.

  law, labourers elude 4
    "  course allowed by 289 n.
    "  interpretation of 178
    "  firm and forcible 296
    "  Common 297, _see_ statutes, and execution of law

  Lawrence, W., bequest of 260 n.

  Laxton-cum-Morehouse 257 n., 365

  lazars and lazar houses 8, 26 seq., 201, _see_ lepers

  _leamit and impotent persones_ 280 n.

  Leche, charity of 204

  legacies, _see_ bequests, charities

  legislation 296, 297
       "      history of 3 seq., 53 seq., 62, 67 seq., 133 seq.,
        278 seq.
       "      French 290 seq., _see_ statutes

  Leicester co. 299
      "     boro. 45, 111, 129, 188
      "     Earl of 86 n.

  lending cash charities 204, 232 seq., 271

  Leominster 262 n.

  lepers 27 n., 42, 54, 209 n.

  Lesnex 264 n.

  letter to be obtained by travellers 4
     "   beggars with 54
     "   of Archbp. 122
     "   to Carleton 145, 146, _see_ Privy Council

  Letters Patent 28, 33, 161, 209, 271, 291

  Lever 28, 30, 64

  Lewes 187

  _Liber Vagatorum_ 13

  licences 70, 241
     "     for badgers 322, 323 seq.
     "     to erect working houses 138 n.
     "     to collect money 271
     "     to transport corn 150 seq.

  Lichfield 234, 274 n.

  Liddington 338

  Lieutenants, Lord 51, 241
       "       Deputy 153, 154, 337

  lights, payment for 58 n.

  Lincoln co. 82, 87 n., 157, 191, 194, 226
     "    boro. 41 seq., 42, 45, 111

  Lingen's almshouses 211 n.

  Linlithgow 283 n.

  Little 264 n.

  Liverpool 194 n., 227

  living idly 142, 173, 174, _see_ idlers

  loan, _loone_ 24, 51, 124 n., _see_ lending cash

  Locke, letter of 145 n.

  lodgers, _see_ inmates

  lodging 18, 214, 279, 290

  Loes 264 n., 365

  loiterers 68

  London 34, 38, 40, 45, 46, 52, 54, 56, 62 seq., 66, 86 n., 98, 108,
        111, 123, 150, 212, 217, 219, 227, 229, 233, 235, 269, 270,
        272, 273, 293, 295, 297 n.
     "   organisation of poor in 23-40, 95-101
     "   orders for repressing vagrants 5, 21, 25
     "   population of 188
     "   Court of orphans in 9 n.
     "   official collection of alms 26
     "   fifteenth levied 29, 100, 116
     "   assessment for poor 117
     "   collection in 160 n.
     "   small holdings in 73
     "   coal yard in 199
     "   pest house of 200
     "   corn store in 23, 188
     "   precepts of 305 seq.
     "   authorities of 92 seq.
     "   parishes in and about 157, 157 n.

  looms 37, 111

  Lords, ordinance of 270, 371
    "    jurisdiction of 158
    "    to go to country 146

  Lords, House of 58, 68, 69, 70, 75, 76, 79

  Lords Lieutenant, _see_ Lieutenant

  Lothian 283

  Lothingland 190 n.

  Louis XI. 14

  Low Countries 123

  Lucy, Sir Thomas 90 n.

  Lukyn, Rob. 176

  lunatics 27 n., 36

  Luther 13

  Lydd 8, 178

  Lynn, 7, 261, 264 n.

  Lyons 291


  maces 271

  Mackworth, Sir Hen. 338

  magistrates 106, 128, 213, 246 n., 300, _see_ justices

  Maidenhead 216 n.

  Maidstone 192, 223, 261

  Mainsborough 247

  maintenance, cost of 113

  _Maioris Bocke_ 102, 106, 308

  malefactors 241

  malting 186 seq.
     "    prohibited 123, 144, 179, 186

  Malton 170 n., 213

  maltsters 145, 331, 335
      "     disobedient 179, 186
      "     contribute to poor 186, _see_ malting

  Man, Edw. 197 n.

  Manchester 228 n.

  Mansbridge 256 n.

  Mansion House 40

  manufactures, manufacturers 15, 48, 49, 140, 147, 155, 230, 271
        "       losses of 148, 259, _see_ trade

  Manwood 86, 318

  mariners 43, 53, 55, 75, 78, 211, 211 n.

  maritime districts 85

  market, supply of 85, 87 seq., 120, 140, 144, 152, 186, 187 seq.,
        193, 194, 195, 196, 316, 319 seq., 323 seq., 339, 340 seq.,
        _see_ corn

  Markham, East 257 n., 364
      "    West 365

  Marlborough 179 n., 260 n.

  marriage of poor maids 137 n.

  Marshal, Earl 338

  Marshalsea 220

  marshals, _see_ provost marshals

  Marten, charity of 216 n.

  Martin, Rich., charity of 234 n.

  Mary, Queen 27 n., 58

  master, &c. of London beggars 25

  masterless men 37, 39, 69, 108, _see_ vagrants

  masters of apprentices 215, 216, 239, 253, 359

  materials bought for poor 223, 224, 256, 261, 264, 272

  Matilda, wife of Hen. I. 27 n.
     "      "      Stephen 27 n.

  matron 34, 35 n., 209, 219, 355

  Mattersey 257 n.

  mayor 44, 55, 56, 57, 59, 72, 106, 134 n.

  Mayor, Lord 23, 24, 30, 31, 95, 193, 305 seq., _see_ London

  meal 188, 189 n., 283 n
    "  price fixed 193

  meals provided 123, 242, _see_ billeting

  meetings of justices 159, 173, 175-178, 181, 182, 247, 249, 250, 253,
        345, 357, 359
      "    of churchwardens and overseers 342

  Melmerby 170 n.

  Mercers, Company of 27 n., 233

  Merchant Adventurers 86 n., 145 n., 148 n., 152, 153
      "    Eastland 148 n.
      "    strangers 86 n., 152
      "    companies 210
      "    taylor 224

  merchants 48 seq., 115 n., 140, 147, 152 seq., 211, 230

  Merchants' Hospital 210

  Merthyr Tydfil 141 n.

  Michelle Louise 303

  Middlesex 70 n., 93, 156 n., 160 n., 228, 264, 360

  Middle Temple Hall 79

  Middleton 251

  midland counties 240

  Mildenhall 335

  Mildmay 86, 318

  mill 37

  millers 195, 335, 340

  mines, assessment of 135 n.

  minister 77, 122, 122 n., 128, 154, 191 n., 246 n., 337
     "     Scotch 283, 287

  Minories 272

  minstrels, _minstrells_ 69, 70, 82, 139, 344

  minutes 156, 173

  Misterton 257 n.

  Mitford 191 n.

  Mombridge 114 n.

  monasteries 18 seq., 61, 277
       "      dissolution of 26, 63 seq., 56, _see_ tithes

  Moner, Anthony 110

  money, value of 212 seq.
    "    gifts of 345, 346, 349
    "    agreement to contribute 280 n., _see_ rates, lending cash

  monks and nuns 63, _see_ monasteries

  Monslow 250, 299 n.

  More, Mr 227 n.

  More, Sir Thomas 12 n., 57, 62

  Morleston 299 n.

  Morton Hampstead 211

  municipal rulers, _see_ town

  murders 288

  Mutford 190 n.

  mutiny, mutinee 85


  nails, nailhouse 33, 37

  Negroose 297 n.

  Netherlands 14, 16, 49

  Newark 204, 225, 234

  Newbury 197 n., 234, 260

  Newby, Francis 112 n.

  Newcastle 124 seq., 201, 202, 202 n.

  new comers 23, 98, 107 seq., 307, 314

  Newgate, Bristol 221

  New Forest 250

  Nicholas 232

  nightman 356

  nobles, noblemen 14, 55

  Norfolk 84, 88, 125, 126, 127, 157, 162, 185, 190, 220, 263, 303,
        316 seq.
     "    justices of 94, 218, 220, 331
     "    Duke of 47, 48, 50 n.

  Normancross 82

  Normans, _see_ Bridewell, Norwich

  Norris, Lord 126, 127

  Northampton co. 82, 144, 151, 259, 266
       "      boro. 160 n.

  Northaw 181, 182

  northern circuit 157
      "    counties 254

  Northowram 169 n.

  Northumberland 191, 239

  Norwich 45, 101 seq., 129, 188, 204, 209 seq., 219, 220, 224, 227,
        231, 261, 300
     "    organisation of poor in 95, 101-107, 179, 186, 198,
        199 seq., 308
     "    tax at 117, 163
     "    Mayor of 104, 106, 162
     "    cathedral of 273
     "    sessions at 331
     "    St John's parish in 103 n.
     "    assessment of 367 seq.
     "    orders for poor &c. in, _see_ orders
     "    census at 103, 308 seq., _see_ Bridewell and St Giles'
     "    Bishop of 58 n.
     "    Dean and Chapter of 101

  Nottingham co. 178, 192, 256 n., 264, 266, 361
       "     boro. 218, 227, 228

  Nuremburg 20


  Oakham 338

  oath of corn jurors 320 seq.

  oatmeal 194

  obiits 43

  obstinate persons 59, 71 seq., 279

  occupations in Bridewell 33, 100, 312, 354, 370

  occupiers of land, liability of 77, 134 n., 168

  occupiers responsible for tenants 108

  Odsey 190 n., 191 n., 196, 228, 263 n., _see_ Edwinstree

  officials, training of 92
      "      local 52, 92 seq.
      "      parochial 96, _see_ town rulers

  Offlow 262 n.

  old, provision for 43, 112, 206 seq., _see_ poor

  order, peace 47 seq., 51, 80 seq., 85, 91, 122 n., 127, 145, 196 seq.,
        272, 298 seq., 303, 338 seq., _see_ riots, disturbances &c.

  Orders of Bishop 78
     "   and Directions, Book of 2 n., 87, 142, 152, 156, 158 seq., 164,
        171 seq., 177, 197, 240, 248 seq., 265 n., 268, 276, 277, 292,
        294, 297 seq., 340, 342, 357, 365

    "    of Privy Council 47 seq., 80 seq., 143, 149, 150, 240 seq.
    "         "           _re_ corn 49, 84 seq., 119 seq., 125, 150,
        318, 334
    "    scarcity book of 87 seq., 144, 145, 151, 158, 185 seq.,
        192 seq., 318 seq., 334
    "    draft of 86, 318 seq.
    "    _re_ vagrants 81 seq., 282 seq.
    "    of justices 167 seq., 171 n., 180 seq., 214 n., 331 seq.
    "    of the House 76
    "    for Royal Hospitals 36 seq.
    "    for Christ's Hospital, Ipswich 113
    "    for poor &c., Norwich 105 seq., 311 seq.
    "    for poor, London 92 seq., 98 seq.
    "    for poor, Cornwall 130 n.

  Ordinance of the Lords 270, 371

  ordinances at Cambridge 44
       "     of Bridewell 356
       "     French 291

  ordinaries 86 n.

  orphanages 215, 219 seq., 273

  orphans 8 seq., 117, 136, 137 n., 199, 264 n., 272

  Ossett 169 n.

  Oswald, King 2

  overseers 71, 76, 78, 90, 90 n., 154, 159, 167, 169 n., 170 n.,
        171 n., 175 seq., 180 seq., 201, 204, 214 n., 217, 231, 244,
        247, 250, 258 n., 263 n., 265 n., 274, 279, 299
      "     accounts of 174, 327 seq.
      "     presented 171, 171 n.
      "     reports of 173, 248 seq., 345 seq.
      "     collectors of revenue 268
      "     inquiries made from 247, 337, 342 seq.

  outdoor relief 141 n.

  Owen, Dame 210

  owners of corn 192

  Oxford co. 82, 88, 126, 127, 148 n. 1 and n. 2, 193, 262 n., 303
    "    boro. 215 n., 221 n., 234


  painter 310

  Palmer, Sir Guy 338

  Palmer, William 121 n.

  Palmistry, _palmestrye_ 69, _see_ fortune tellers

  pamphlets _re_ St Bartholomew's 34
     "      _Stanleyes Remedy_ 243
     "      _Greevous Grones &c._ 243 seq.
     "      Arth's 127 seq.
     "      on fishing trade 273
     "      on poor 275, 276

  paper makers 201

  papers, to wear 125

  Papworth 82 n., 264, 358

  parental government 65, 66

  parents, 215, 219
     "     liability of 134

  Paris, 290, 291

  parish, officers of 77, 342
     "    landward 279

  parishes 63, 134 n., 153, 154, 169, 210, 211 n., 242, 306
     "     liability of 5, 154, 278, 281
     "     rich 55, 77, 106, 158

  parishioners 6, 44, 55, 58, 72, 99, 168, 230 n.

  Parliament 6 seq., 29, 56 seq., 64, 67-80, 83, 91, 130, 131,
        133 seq., 135, 294
      "      resolutions of 271
      "      of Paris 291, _see_ statutes

  parsons, vicars, curates 52, 55, 57, 109 n., 117, 134 n., 135 n.,
        290, 305, 306, 307

  passes, counterfeiting of 70, _see_ letters

  patent gatherers 344

  paternal government 65, 140, 201, 203

  Pater's almshouse 213

  patients 34, 39, 269

  paupers 203, 204, 210, _see_ poor
     "    goods made by 33, 100
     "    increase of 289

  payments, amount of 104
      "     to poor 180
      "     for children 219
      "     for emigrants 229, _see_ taxation, pensions

  pedlars 68, 70, 82

  Pember, Francis 222 n.

  Pembroke co. 151, 225

  penalties 135 n., 175, 177, _see_ fines

  pensioners 208, 209

  pensions, allowances, for poor 35, 44, 96, 97 n., 99, 106, 143, 180,
        182, 211, 213, 214, 252, 258 n., 274, 276
      "     for soldiers and sailors 136

  Perne, Dr 44

  Perse, Martin 176

  personal government 153, 163, 164, 172, 241, 295

  Perthshire 283 n.

  pest houses 200, 201

  Peterborough, soke of 185

  Petersfield 174

  Petherton, North 254 n., 261

  petite forfeitures 75

  petition of Commons 4 n.
     "     of citizens of London 28, 32 seq.
     "     of Sylva Harbert 160

  Pevensey 185, 191 n.

  _Phisnomye_ 69

  Physician 201, 202, 208

  _pickeryes_ 298

  Pider 187

  pinmakers 218, 354

  pins 100

  Pirehill 262 n.

  plague 42, 130 n., 144, 160, 167, 182, 200 seq., 306, 360, _see_ rates

  Planner, charity of 216 n.

  plantations 230

  players, _plaiers_ 69, 138 n., 344

  plays, _plaies_ 100

  Plomesgate 264 n., 365

  Plymouth 219

  pole, for every 121

  Poole 227 n.

  poor, def. of 32 seq., 36, 127 seq., 139 seq.
    "   three classes of 32 seq., 44, 64, 139 seq.
    "   surveyed 42, 44, 103, 261
    "   census of 103, 308, 314
    "   in great distress 30, 123, 125, 147, 247, 282
    "   questions touching 342 seq.
    "   expulsion of strange poor, _see_ new comers
    "   sins of 128
    "   two collections for 45
    "   earnings of 105
    "   feeding a hundred 3
    "   appeal to sessions 167, _see_ poor relief rates
    "   impotent 83, 87, 128 seq., 153 seq., 180, 207 seq., 238
    "   statutory regulations concerning 5, 53 seq., 70, 71, 79, 134
    "   relief reported by justices 89 seq., 174 seq., 182 seq., 214,
        245, 247, 250, 252, 253 n., 256, 258, 275 seq., 356, 358, 359,
        361 seq., 365
    "   in towns 28, 32, 40, 64, 98 seq.
    "   Scotch 281 seq.
    "   French 290 seq.
    "   able-bodied, _see_ work, vagrants, rogues
    "   children, _see_ children and apprentices
    "   criminal 220
    "   laws, _see_ statutes and execution of poor law
    "   relief by private individuals 2, 17 seq.
    "     "    by monasteries 3, 18 seq., 26 seq., 63 seq.
    "     "    by tithes 3, 6 seq.
    "     "    from other endowed charities 7 seq., 19 seq., 26 seq.,
        207 seq.
    "     "     by guilds 7, 42, 43 n., 210
    "     "     in the towns 7 seq., 22 seq., 62 seq., 65, 95 seq., 121,
        122 seq., 129 seq., 174, 208 seq., 259 seq., 278 seq., 280,
        285 seq., 286 n., 293 seq., 305 seq.
    "     "     provided by statute 3 seq., 6, 45, 53 seq., 60, 62,
        67 seq., 131, 133 seq., 278 seq.
    "     "     efforts of Privy Council to enforce 47 seq., 83 seq.,
        119 seq., 143 seq., 184 seq., 201
    "     "     characteristics of 203 seq.
    "     "     connected with order 48 seq., 51, 80 seq., 85 seq., 91,
        122 n., 123, 125, 145, 196 seq., 298, 303 seq., 338 seq.
    "     "     connected with increase of beggars 39, 64 seq.
    "     "     connected with labour statutes 3 seq., 9
    "     "     connected with scarcity measures 23 seq., 51, 84 seq.,
        91, 197 seq.
    "     "     connected with voluntary system 136 seq., 204
    "     "     under the Commonwealth 272 seq.
    "     "     on the continent 20 seq., 277 seq.
    "     "     in Scotland 278 seq.
    "     "     in France 290 seq.
    "     "     in emergency 184 seq.
    "     "     ordinary 124, 133, 206 seq.
    "     "     insufficient 284, 286 seq., 288
    "     "     outdoor 35, 42, 99, 214 seq.
    "     "     alteration in opinion about 131
    "     "     political side of 295 seq.
    "     "     summary of early history 293 seq.
    "     "     results 297 seq., 300, _see_ work, children, poor,
        pensions, corn, almshouses, hospitals, rates

  _poore makers_ 128

  Popham 86, 318

  population of London 188
      "      of Banff 284
      "      of Portsmouth 173

  porter 355

  Portsmouth 151, 173

  pottage 198

  poultry 51

  poverty, cause of 128

  preachers 290, 307, 355

  preambles 53, 54, 246, 292

  precepts 95 seq., 305, 306

  prerogative 296, 297

  presbytery 281, 284

  presentments 170 n., 173 seq., 177, 182, 247, 344, 345, 357, 358

  President of Council of North 80, 86 n.
      "     of Corporation of Poor 272

  Preston 228

  Price, Mary, almshouses of 211 n.

  Price's hospital 211 n.

  prices fixed by authority 51, 88, 121, 193
     "   moderated by justices 87, 190, 194, 302, 324
     "   rise in 16, 49, 50, 73, 84, 194
     "   enquiries touching 84 seq.
     "   of corn 16, 50, 73, 84, 119-124, 145 n., 341
     "      "    sudden alteration in 121 n.
     "   of oatmeal 194
     "   of provisions 16 n.

  priest 13

  priests 3, 4, _see_ tithes

  prior 207

  priories 290

  prisoners, _presonars_ 33, 53, 70, 75, 77, 136, 167, 220 seq.,
        228 n., 229, 279, 299, 311

  prisons 220 seq., _see_ prisoners

  privilege of Parliament 76

  privileges, payments for 117

  Privy Council 33, 46, 47-53, 67, 68, 80-94, 118, 119, 125, 130, 131,
        137, 142-166, 171, 172, 178, 179, 193, 201, 216, 230, 232, 253,
        268, 276, 277, 286, 296, 334
     "     "    letters of 52, 81, 85, 86 n., 143, 149, 154, 155, 162,
        165, 166, 174, 175, 240 seq., 292, 294-297, 304, 336 seq.,
        338 seq., 359
     "     "    letters to 126, 147, 340
     "     "    instructions of 193
     "     "    thanks to 194
     "     "    lords of 204, _see_ Privy Councillors
     "     "    Scotch 282 seq., _see_ corn, orders, reports

  Privy Council Register 143, 150, 156, 156 n., 336 seq., 338 seq.

  Privy Councillors 156, 204, 297

  _Privie Seale_, Lord 338

  procession 8

  proclamations, royal 3, 51, 86, 143, 144 bis, 145, 146 bis, 150, 165,
        166, 296, 298
        "        of 1629 153, 155, 171, 172
        "        Scotch 283, 286 seq.
        "        municipal 104, 305

  proctors or procurators 69, 70, 344

  _Providours of the Poore_ 110

  _Provision for the poore now in penurie_ 127 seq.

  proviso _re_ Dutton 138

  provost 279

  provost marshals 93, 298

  Pukenham, North 317

  punishment of able-bodied beggars 4, 25 seq., 53, 70, 77, 80 seq.,
        221, 299 n.
      "      _fourme_ of 94
      "      at Bury 114, _see_ whipping, fines, death, branding, stocks

  Purchas, Thos. 176

  Puritan counties 297

  Puriton 254 n., 261


  Quarter Sessions, _see_ Sessions

  questions put to judges 178
      "      "  overseers 247, 337, 342 seq.

  quinzièmes, _see_ fifteenths


  Radfield 192 n., 253 n., 256 n., 264 n.

  Radnorshire, report from 247

  Ragland 252, 262 n.

  Ragnell 362

  Rahere 27

  raker 355

  Raleigh, Sir Walter 76, 79, 294

  Rampton 363

  Rand, Samuel 202 n.

  rates, tax, taxation 1, 2, 38, 59, 60, 62, 64, 71, 95, 106, 108,
        130 n., 204, 251, 254, 256, 261, 268, 269, 279, 296, 358
    "    imposed by town rulers before 1572 29, 42, 43, 45, 102
    "    for soldiers and sailors 73, 78, 79, 136, 166
    "    for prisoners and hospitals 77, 167, 220
    "    for Houses of Correction 118, 137, 167
    "    for plague stricken 137, 200, 201
    "    for setting poor to work 121, 154, 225, 255 seq.
    "    for corporation of poor 273 n.
    "    semi-voluntary 59, 97
    "    dispute concerning 179 n.
    "    refusal and objection to pay 168, 169, 197 n., 248, 260 n., 350
    "    increased 158, 175, 177, 245, 248 seq., 250
    "    in Scotland 282, 283 seq., 286 seq.
    "    in Aberdeen 285, 289
    "    in Glasgow 289, 290 n.
    "    in France 291
    "    in Norwich 367
    "    amount of, Rochdale 251
    "       "       Ware 346
    "       "       Braughing and Stortford 348 seq.
    "    none in Middleton 251
    "    legality at Lydd 178
    "    in aid, _see_ parishes, rich
    "    of wages, _see_ wages

  ratepayers 141 n., 261, 290, 303

  Ravensworth 170 n.

  Reading 112, 114, 129, 156, 157 n., 192, 200, 200 n., 204, 216,
        217 n., 218, 225, 231, 259, 263

  rebels, rebellion 51, 73, 80, 81, 126, 151, _see_ order

  recognizance 179, 321 seq.

  recusants 173, 182

  Redcliffe almshouse 210, 213

  Red Maid's School 219

  Reepham 331

  reeves 2

  Reformation 20, 207, 208

  refugees 110 n.

  _refuissars_ 289 n.

  register of names 71, 290

  regrating, regrators 50, 50 n., 73, 320, 332, 358

  Reigate 261

  Reynolds, Thomas 163

  relief, _see_ poor relief

  relief works 141

  rent 214

  Repertories 25 n.

  reports _re_ corn 50, 87, 88 seq., 149, 151, 152, 172, 185 seq., 193
        seq., 195, 204, 316 seq., 326, 334 seq., 340 seq., 344 seq.
     "    _re_ vagrants 80, 81 seq.
     "    _re_ poor relief and vagrants 173 seq., 177, 181 seq., 245,
        248, 251 seq., 256 seq., 268, 297, 342 seq.
     "    not in northern counties 239
     "    from same place at different dates 253, 252
     "    of four royal hospitals 269 seq., 369 seq.
     "    of Bridewell 351 seq.
     "    Bassetlaw 257 seq.
     "    Cambridge 174 seq.

  resolutions of 1527 135 n., _see_ judges at Quarter Sessions 275

  Restoration 275, 277

  retainers 15, 120

  Retford 361

  returns, overseers 214 n., _see_ reports

  revenues for armies 268

  Revolution, French 291, 303

  Rhodes, hospital for defence of 27 n.

  Rhuddlan Castle 139

  rich 145 n., 201, 302 seq.

  Richard II. 54, 293

  Richmondshire 171, 255

  Riding, North 203, 213, 214 n.
    "       "   Session, Rolls of 169 seq.
    "     West, Sessions, Rolls of 167 seq., 241, 248

  Ridley, Bishop 30-33, 35, 59 n.

  riots, rioters 49, 51, 85, 148 n., 151, 192, 197 n., 288, 303

  Ripon 185

  Rixman's charity 216 n.

  roads 84

  robbery 13, 126, 288, 303

  Rochdale 251

  Rochester 110

  Rogers, Prof. 301 n.

  rogues 227 n., 256, 332
    "    bills for 75, 76, 137
    "    act for 77
    "    def. of 68 seq., 344
    "    depredations of 13, 126, 288, 298, 303
    "    incorrigible 57
    "    poor unjustly made 168
    "    questions touching 344
    "    branding of 138 n., _see_ vagrants

  Rolls of Parliament 4

  Romer, Lord Justice 141 n.

  Romsey 85

  roundsman system 130 n., 232

  Royal Exchange 242

  royalists 274

  rule which must govern clothier &c. 148

  rumours, false and seditious 81

  Rupert, Prince 231

  Rutland 156 n., 265 n., 338 seq.
     "    Duke of 89, 187

  Ruxley 264 n.

  Rycherds, John 331

  Rye 8 n.

  Ryedale 177 n., 259 n.


  Sabbath, _see_ Sunday

  sailors 73, 77, 93, 213, _see_ mariners

  St Albans 108 seq., 110, 117, 117 n., 129, 163 n., 199, 261, 263 n.
      "     Liberty of 181, 191 n., 255 n., 263 n.

  St Andrews, Andries, Norwich 101, 310

  St Anthony's, Broad Street 27 n.
       "        York 114

  St Augustine, rule of 19

  St Bartholomew's, London 27 n., 28, 30, 31, 34, 36, 38, 39, 98,
        201, 208, 269, 369
     "      "       Glos. 129, 208
     "      "       Sandwich 8, 208

  St Benedict, parish of 367

  St Catherine's, York 209
     "     "      by the Tower 27 n.

  St Cross, hospital of 207 seq.

  St Edmondes, Norwich 310

  St Edmund's, Gateshead 209

  St Ethelbert's, Hereford 211 n.

  St Ethelred, Liberty of 191 n., 365

  St Giles', London, parish of 264 n., 360
     "       in the Fields 27 n.
     "       Hereford 8 n., 208, 211 n.
     "       Norwich 105, 198 seq., 209 seq.
     "       Reading parish 212

  St James' in the Fields 27 n.
      "     church of King's Lynn 224

  St John's, of Jerusalem 27 n.
      "      Nottingham 227
      "      Sandwich 8
      "      Sepulchre 104 n.
      "      Walbrook 97

  St Julianes, Norwich 310

  St Just 213 n.

  St Leonard's, Launceston 209, 209 n.

  St Margaret's, Glos. 129, 208

  St Mary's, Barking 27 n.
      "      Cripplegate 27 n.

  St Mary Magdalen, Exeter 8 n.
      "      "      Glos. 129 n., 208
      "      "      King's Lynn 209
      "   Rounceval 27 n.
      "   Redcliffe 210

  St Mary's, Spital 27 n., 97

  St Nicholas, London 28
       "       Scarborough 8 n.

  St Paul's Hospital, Norwich 101

  St Peter's parish, Norwich 308

  St Sepulchre 264 n., 360 n.

  St Thomas' of Acon 27 n.
      "      parish of, Bristol 210
      "      Hospital, Scarborough 8
      "      Hospital, York 209
       "         "     Southwark 19, 27 n., 28, 31, 33, 34, 35, 36,
        38, 39, 98, 201, 269, 370

  Sands, Mr 69, 83, 130

  Sandwich 7 seq., 208

  Sandys, Lord 48

  Sarum, division of 204

  Sarum, New 200

  Savoy, hospital of 27 n., 63

  Sawbridgeworth, Sabridgworth 343 n., 345, 347, 348

  Scarborough 8, 170 n., 213

  scarcity, _see_ corn

  Schirewoode John 176

  scholars, poor 29 n., 53, 70, 136

  _schoole dames_ 218, 332

  schools, scoole 103, 136, 215, 217, 218, 219, 308
     "     industrial 113, 217, _see_ Bridewell
     "     Free 27 n.
     "     knitting 111, 111 n., 218 seq., 300, 332
     "     King Edward's 38

  Scotland 14, 54, 183, 267, 277 seq., 293, 294, 303

  Scrivener, Mrs Alice 234

  scrutineers, Glos. 129 n.

  sea, vagrants sent to 229, 230 n.

  searchers for vagrants, _see_ vagrants

  Segewyche, Dr 44

  select women 104, 105, 107, 218, 313

  Sellside 218

  Semys, almshouse of 213

  senators 273

  Sergeant-at-Mace 187 n.

  serges 225

  sermons 55, 212, 307

  Servall, Agnes 65

  servants 55, 299
     "     stubborn 94
     "     refusing to serve as 179 n.
     "     whether hired by the year 104
     "     discharging of 128, _see_ labourers

  service, _cervis_, _servis_ 65, 70
      "    placing in 77, 83
      "    people to go to 104 n., 105, 142 n., 315
      "    living out of 142, 142 n., 179 n., 228 n., 263, 350

  serving men 211 n.

  Sessions, Quarter 77, 88, 120, 126, 134 n., 143, 154, 167 seq.,
        214 n., 275, 331, 337, 340, 343, 371
      "     Petty 177 n., _see_ kirk sessions

  Session of 1597-8, 74, 75 seq.

  settlement regulations 5, 107 seq., 167, 179 n., 302

  Shaftesbury 262 n.

  Shaile, Rich. 212 n.

  shearmen 149

  sheep farming 17

  sheeting 222

  Sheffield 225

  Shelf 169 n.

  Shepton Mallet 228 n.

  Shepway 187, 191 n., 256 n.

  Sheriffs 81, 143, 173, 224, 319
     "     High 340, 351

  Shinfield 217 n.

  ship money 164

  shipmen 70

  ships 43, 93, 100, 123

  shirts, charities for 212, 212 n.

  shoemakers 139, 234, 338, 339

  shop-keepers 233, 234

  shops, fines for opening on Sunday 117

  Shrewsbury 123 seq., 189, 260
      "      Eliz., Countess of 17

  Shropham 88

  Shropshire 157, 224, 262, 299

  sick 7, 201 seq., 203, 306

  Sick Man's Hospital 8 n., 211 n.

  silk lace 100

  silkmen 233, _see_ weavers

  Silkston 169 n.

  silver, influx of 16

  silver plate 202

  Sisters of St Cross 208 n.
     "    of Normans, _see_ St Paul's, Norwich

  Skenfreth 252, 253

  Slaney, charity of 216 n.

  slaves 56

  Smith, Henry, charity of 222 n.

  Smithfield 108, _see_ St Bartholomew's

  Smiths, guild of 42 n.

  smocks, charities for 212, 212 n.

  Soke 256 n.

  soldiers, _souldiers_, _sojouries_, _souldyours_ 14, 73, 75, 78,
        87, 93, 136, 143, 170, 211, 213, 220, 245, 290 n., 325, 327 n.,
        369, 370

  Somerset 84, 86 n., 126 seq., 145, 148 n. 1 and n. 2, 180, 185, 254,
        261, 298, 299
     "     Duke of 51, 303

  Sorbonne 20

  south eastern counties 240

  Southampton, Hampton 9, 43 n., 86 n.

  Southgate, Norwich 308

  Southwark 35, _see_ St Thomas' Hospital

  Spain 89

  Spaldyng, Samuel 176

  Spanish ports 147

  Spencer, Sir Will. 126

  spinners 85, 147, 349

  spinning 218, 223, 226, 272, 276, 358
     "     house, Bridewell 37

  spinster, spynsters, 65 n., 149, 160

  Sprott's charity 235 n.

  stability 15, 302, 304

  Stafford co. 262
     "     boro. 186, 274 n.

  Staine 82, 191 n., 264 n.

  Stamford 157, 157 n., 197 n.

  Stanbury, Mr 121

  Stancliff 299 n.

  standard of comfort 198

  Standon 347

  Stanleyes Remedy 243

  Stansted Abbots 345 n., 346

  Staplegrove, Stapelgrove 180, 214, 327 seq.

  Staploe 82, 191 n., 264 n.

  Star Chamber 119, 125

  starch 325

  Startforth 214 n.

  starvation 124, 125

  state control 6 seq.

  statutes, laws 3 seq., 45, 53 seq., 59, 60, 62, 67 seq., 73, 79, 81,
        87, 133 seq., 143, 153
      "     Scotch 278 seq.
      "     apprenticeship 155
      "     of chantries 43
      "     common or statute law 297
      "     of Ethelred 3
      "     factory 62
      "     labour 3, 151, 256, 293, 343 n., 358, 359, _see_ wages
      "     of retainers 120
      "     of rogues 77, 141
      "     for raising publicke stockes 147
      "     effects of 297 seq., 302, _see_ execution of law
      "     particular, mentioned or referred to:
           51 Hen. III. 332
           13 Edw. I. 332
           36 Edw. III. c. 8, 4
           12 Rich. II. cc. 3 and 7, 4 seq.
           15 Rich. II. c. 6, 6 seq.
            4 Hen. IV. c. 12, 7
            2 Hen. V. St. I. c. 1, 20
            8 Hen. VI. c. 5, 332
           10 Hen. VII. c. 4, 332
           11 Hen. VII. c. 2, 5, 332
           19 Hen. VII. c. 12, 5
           22 Hen. VIII. c. 12, 12, 53 seq., 56, 57, 60, 62, 73, 78, 291
           23 Hen. VIII. c. 11, 332
           25 Hen. VIII. c. 1, 320
           27 Hen. VIII. c. 25, 2, 53, 54 seq., 59, 60, 62, 278, 291
            1 Edw. VI. c. 3, 56 seq., 70, 79
            3 and 4 Edw. VI. c. 16, 57, 58, 60
            5 and 6 Edw. VI. c. 2, 57, 58, 60 n.
            5 and 6 Edw. VI. c. 14, 320 n.
            7 Edw. VI. c. 11, 58
            1 Mary St. II. c. 13, 58
            1 Mary St. III. c. 12, 58
            2 and 3 Ph. and Mary c. 5, 58, 60
            4 and 5 Ph. and Mary c. 9, 58
            1 Eliz. c. 2, 332
            5 Eliz. c. 3, 58, 59, 60, 71, 102, 106, 291
            5 Eliz. c. 4, 140, 162, 163 n., 256, 302, 343 n., 358, 359
            5 Eliz. c. 12, 320, 322
           14 Eliz. c. 5, 2, 68, 69 seq., 79, 95, 96, 130, 131, 220, 278
           18 Eliz. c. 3, 68, 72, 79
           23 Eliz. c. 1, 332
           27 Eliz. c. 11, 72
           29 Eliz. c. 5, 72
           31 Eliz. c. 10, 72
           35 Eliz. c. 4, 73, 136
           35 Eliz. c. 6, 73
           35 Eliz. c. 7, 73
           39 Eliz. c. 3, 76 seq., 80, 133, 134, 135, 140, 143, 167,
        220, 238, 241, 281, 294
           39 Eliz. c. 4, 77, 332
           39 Eliz. c. 5, 77
           39 Eliz. c. 6, 78, 136, 137
           39 Eliz. c. 16, 331
           39 Eliz. c. 17, 78
           39 Eliz. c. 21, 78, 136
           43 Eliz. c. 2, 133 seq., 138, 140 n., 238, 240, 253 n.,
        281, 292
           43 Eliz. c. 3, 136, 138 n., 220, 332
            1 Jac. I. c. 6, 162
            1 Jac. I. c. 7, 138 n., 243
            1 Jac. I. c. 9, 138 n., 332
            1 Jac. I. c. 27, 138 n.
            1 Jac. I. c. 31, 137
            2 Jac. I. c. 4, 331
            3 Jac. I. c. 4, 138 n., 332
            4 Jac. I. cc. 4 and 5, 331
            4 Jac. I. c. 5, 138 n.
            7 Jac. I. c. 3, 138 n.
            7 Jac. I. c. 4, 137, 243, 332
            7 Jac. I. c. 10, 332
            7 Jac. I. c. 11, 138 n.
           21 Jac. I. c. 1, 138 n.
           21 Jac. I. c. 7, 138 n.
           21 Jac. I. c. 20, 138 n.
           21 Jac. I. c. 28, 138 n.
            1 Car. I. c. 1, 138 n.
            3 Car. I. c. 2, 138 n.
            3 Car. I. c. 5, 138 n.
           13 and 14 Car. II. c. 12, 107, 109, 239
            4 and 5 Will. IV. c. 76, 135, 294
      "     Scotch:
             James I. c. 66, 278
             James I. c. 103, 278
             James V. c. 22, 278
             James V. c. 74, 279
             James V. c. 149, 279
             James V. c. 272, 281
             James VI. c. 19, 281 n.
             James VI. c. 8, 281 n.
             Chas. II. c. 16, 281 n.
             Chas. II. c. 38, 281 n.

  stent roll 286 n.

  Stettin, Duke of 242

  Stirling 287

  stocks for punishment 4, 35 n., 221, 300
     "   _stockes_ = stores 72, 85, 87, 118, 154, 172, 182, 222 seq.,
        225, 245, 247, 256, 260, 261, 276, 301, 342, 345 seq., 360, 361
     "   town 202 n., 256 seq., 361 seq.
     "   amount of 258, 265
     "   for House of Correction 170 n., _see_ work

  Stockw^{th} 257 n.

  Stoke Newington 360 n.

  Stokeham 362

  stoneminers 224

  Stourbridge, Sturbridge 43 seq., 82

  strangers 101, 128, 242, 286 n., _see_ merchant strangers

  strike 141 n.

  stockings 112 n.

  Stortford 345 n., 348, 349, 350

  Stow 18, 26
    "  hundred of 82, 264 n., 358 seq.

  Stretford 186 n.

  Stuarts 66, 297, 300

  subscriptions 97, 202 n., 210

  subsidy 112 n., 116, 268 n.
     "    book 73

  success in Aberdeen 285 n.
     "    in Norwich 106
     "    of corn measures 192 seq.
     "    of Book of Orders 298 seq.

  Sudbury 160

  Suffolk 50, 84, 148, 148 n., 149, 153, 154, 178, 179, 190, 191 n.,
        201, 263, 334, 336 seq.

  Sunday 57, 138 n., 212, _see_ fines, collections

  superintendents of beggars 44

  supervisors of the poor 171 n.

  suppers on fast days 122, 129
      "   of orphan boys 199

  surety 70, 71 n.

  surgeon 202 n., 208, 355

  Surrey co. 83, 87 n., 160 n., 192 n., 228

  survey of corn, _see_ corn

  surveyors, _surveiors_ of beggars 25, 26, 98
      "       of hospitals 129
      "       of poor 167 n.
      "       of highways 343

  swearing, _see_ fines

  Symes, Dr. 202 n.


  Tabard 4

  tailors 103, 117 n.

  Tanner MSS. 180

  Taunton 185, 186, 226

  Taverham 191 n.

  taxes, charities for paying 136, 137 n., _see_ rates, fifteenths,
        subsidies

  technical education, _see_ training
      "     school 217

  Temple, hall of Middle 75
     "    Hospital 210
     "    Gate almshouse 210

  tenants, oppression of 269, _see_ landlords

  tenements 73, 93, 108, 297, _see_ cottages

  tennis balls 100

  testimonials 168, 343

  Tewkesbury 82, 151

  Theale, report from 259

  thefts, thieves 15, 36, 38, 303

  thieves, language of 12, 13

  Thingoe 187

  Thirsk 170 n.

  Thirty Years' War 147

  thread, twisting of 223

  Thredling 264 n.

  Thriplow 82

  Thomas, charity of 215 n.

  Thornaby 111

  Thornbury 82

  Thorne, charity of 235 n.

  Thorner, John 260 n.

  Thornton 203

  Thundridge 345 n., 348

  thurdendeles 179

  tickets, _see_ badges

  Tickhill 168

  tillage 143

  tinkers, _tynkers_ 68, 70, 82, 344

  Tinwell 338

  tippler 69, 321, 324, 332

  tippling, _tiplinge_ 175

  tithe 3, 6 seq., 117, 134 n., 135 n.

  tithingmen 174, 247, 329

  Tiverton, fire at 202

  tokens of tin 26

  tolls 116

  Topcliffe 171

  Totmonslow 262 n.

  tow 182, 225, 232, 272, 349

  town, rulers of 6 seq., 62 seq., 65, 72, 96, 165, 187, 202, 290
    "   control charities 7 seq., 204, 208, 209, 210, 211 n.
    "   contribute to charitable endowments 8, 23
    "   parental government of 65 seq., _see_ poor relief, orders,
        hospitals

  Town Council, Glasgow 289 n.

  Town Clerk 305

  _towne haill_ 285

  towns, importance of Tudor 23
    "    poor relief in, _see_ poor relief
    "    of Suffolk 149
    "    fires in 202
    "    head officials of 78

  trade 115, 148, 148 n., 152, 153, 155, 164, 173, 259, 337, 344
    "   right of exercising 117
    "   teaching 111, 218, 299
    "   depression of 145, 147 seq., 155, 163, 245, 336 seq.

  traders 85, 344, _see_ trades, tradesmen

  tradesmen 136, 223, 235, _see_ lending cash

  training 110 seq., 225, 294

  Treasurer, County 73, 77, 136, 213, 220
      "      Mr 338
      "      Lord 338

  treatise, _see_ pamphlets

  Trellech 252

  trespass, action for 135 n.

  Treswell 364

  Trevor, Sir Thomas 212

  Trinity Hospital, Bristol 209

  troops, number of 274

  truck 163

  Trust, Breaches of 78, 136, 248

  Tudors 66, 297, 298

  Tunstead 191 n.

  Tuxford 364


  undersettles 170 n., _see_ inmates

  undertakers of poor 229

  unemployed 38, 45, 76, 110 seq., 221 seq., 238 seq., _see_ work, and
        Correction, Houses of

  United States 230

  Universities, poor scholars of 29 n., 53, 70, 136

  Uppingham 197 n., 338

  usurers 128

  Utopia 12 n., 15, 57


  V, letter of 25

  Vagrancy Acts 141 n.

  vagrants, vagabonds, _vacaboundes_, sturdy and valiant beggars 15,
        68 seq., 74, 79, 91, 93, 120, 127, 141 n., 156 n., 166, 229
        seq., 252, 282 seq., 325, 336, 344-356, 359, 361 seq., 366,
        370, 371
      "     def. of 68 seq., 344
      "     increase of 11 seq., 13 seq., 40, 53, 102, 127, 241, 270 seq.
      "     decrease of 241, 250, 298 seq., 358
      "     statutory regulations for 4 seq., 53 seq., 56 seq., 69 seq.,
        73, 77, 278 seq.
      "     municipal regulations 5, 25 seq., 37 seq., 65 seq., 98 seq.,
        104, 108, 217, 285, 311, 315, 355
      "     searches for 51, 71, 80 seq., 91, 359, _see_ Correction,
        Houses of, poor relief, statutes, labour and work

  vestry 210, 211 n.

  vicars, _see_ parsons

  Vice-Chancellor 44, 70, 176

  villages, no lack of work in 259

  Vincent, Jenkin 216

  Virginia 229, 230 n.

  visitation, _see_ plague
      "       of Bishop 58 n.

  votes of Parliament 273


  wages 3 seq., 16, 16 n., 52, 140, 160 seq., 224
    "   of silk weavers 156 n.
    "   compared with price of food 198
    "   rise in 300, 301 n.
    "   reasonable 52, 70, 224, 350
    "   during Civil War 275, 301 n.
    "   assessment 161 seq., 343 n., 358, 359, _see_ statutes, labour
    "   of schooldames 218
    "   of waggoner 275

  Wakefield 122, 128 seq., 168 n., 255 n.

  Wales 86 n., 239, 240

  Walker, Dr 44

  Wallingford 83, 216

  Wallington 256, 265, 298

  Walsham 191 n.

  Walsingham 86 n., 94 n.

  Walthamstow 83

  wanderers 298, 344, _see_ vagrants, rogues

  Wangford 190 n.

  Wantage 192

  ward 175, 350, _see_ watches

  Wardell, charity of 221 n.

  Wardrobe 272, 273

  Ware 189 n., 345 n., 346

  warp, white 308 seq.

  warrants 171, 174

  wars 14, 48, 147

  Warsopp 257 n.

  Warwick co. 87 n.
    "     boro. 186
    "     Earl of 160

  waste lands 77

  Wat, Willie 284

  watches, _waches_ 82, 120, 175, 264 n., 299 n., 344, 346 seq., 366

  watchmen 200, 201 n.

  Wath 171 n.

  Watts, charity of 110

  Wayland 88, 191 n., 263, 264 n.

  wealth 15

  weavers, weaving 37, 103, 147, 149, 160, 217 n., 226, 272
     "     silk 156 n., 217, 354
     "     linen 218, 354
     "     ribbon 218, 354

  Weaver's almshouses 211 n.

  Wednesdays 122, _see_ supper

  weights and measures 84, 173, 187 n., 332

  Welhagh 364

  Wellow 263 n.

  Wells 222, 248

  Welsh 139

  Wentllooge 185

  Wentworth, Viscount 157, 164, 295, 338

  Wessington, parish of 6 n.
       "      Sir Walter de 6 n.

  Western counties 155, 192, 245, 262

  Westmill 249, 343 n., 345 n., 347, 349

  Westminster 73, 160 n., 196 n.

  Westmoreland 218, 239, 298

  Wetherley 82

  wheels 111, 112 n.

  whipping, punishment of 25, 53, 54, 57, 62, 65, 70, 71 n., 73, 77,
        98, 105, 221, 243, 278, 311, 312

  whipping campaign 80 seq.

  whipping-post 35 n.

  White Friars, House of 129

  White, George 220, 222 n.
    "    Sir Thomas 234

  Whitgift 75, 79, 211

  Whitley 254 n., 261

  Whitmore, George 230 n.

  Whitson 122, 123, 212, 235 n.

  Whittington, Coll. of Richard 27 n.

  Whittlesford 192 n., 253 n., 256 n., 264 n.

  Whitwell 218

  Wickham, West 216 n.

  Wicksted, John 176

  Widford 345, 350

  widows 211 n., 212

  Wigmore 186 n.

  Wildbore, John 338

  Wilford 264 n., 365

  Williams' Hospital, Hereford 211 n.

  Williamson 244

  Williton 245 n.

  wills 55

  Wilmington 264 n.

  Wiltshire 48, 50 n., 86 n., 121, 125, 145, 148 n. 1, n. 2, 204, 228,
        229, 239, 258, 262 n., 266

  Wilson, Mr Thomas 69

  Wilson, Rob., charity of 234 n.

  Wimbledon, Lord 156 n., 157, 164

  Winche's charity 234 n.

  Winchester 114, 118, 207, 223, 255
      "      Bishop of 118, 338

  Windsor 112 n., 200
     "    New 216, 222

  Windsor, Andrew 222
     " Myles 221 n.

  wire 33

  wite theow 2 n.

  witness 116

  Wokingham 216, 216 n.

  Wolsey 16, 20, 47, 48 seq., 50 n.

  Wolverhampton 222 n., 234

  women 103, 313
    "   almshouses for 211 seq.
    "   taught to knit 112 n.
    "   to teach children 181
    "   easily obtain work 198

  Wonford 190 n.

  wood 199, 212, _see_ fuel

  Wood, charity of 216 n.

  Woodchurch 192

  Woodcross 93

  woods owner rated 134 n., 135 n.

  Woodstock 88 n.

  wool 65 n., 72, 85, 111 bis, 147 seq., 262 n.
    "  combers of 161

  woolchapman 224

  woolgrowers 148

  woolhouse 37

  Wootton 88

  Worcester co. 69, 83, 130, 148 n.
      "     boro. 41, 201, 262

  work on highways 343
    "  proceeds of poor's 113
    "  those who refused 134 n., 140 seq., 176, 344
    "  those able to, not able to 103, 308 seq.
    "  lack of 14, 48, 80, 85, 86 n., 115, 146, 149 n., 152 seq.,
       156 n., 160 n., 231, 255 n., 261, 263, 265 n., 338
    "  no lack of 6, 198, 249, 261
    "  questions concerning 342
    "  poor kept at 65, 99, 105, 140, _see_ idlers
    "  found by inhabitants 131 n., 232, 349, 351
    "  provided for soldiers and sailors 78
    "  provided for children 181, 218 seq., 222 n.
    "  overseers ordered to provide 142, 181
    "  provision of for poor 6, 110 seq., 132, 164, 167, 180, 181,
       221 seq., 270 n., 271, 272, 273, 274 seq., 294 seq., 311, 313,
       325, 332, 335, 336, 339, 346 seq., 358 seq.
    "  regulations in statutes and bills 54, 72, 75 seq., 137, 140
    "  orders in Council and proclamations touching 85 seq., 87, 153
       seq., 174, 325, 336 seq., 338 seq.
    "  effect on wages 300 seq.
    "  in particular places in the following counties:
          _Bedford_ 255, 256 n., 261, 265 n.;
          _Berks._ 112 n., 222, 225, 262 n.;
          _Bucks._ 245, 256 n., 261, 265 n.;
          _Cambs._ 175, 253 n., 256 n., 263, 264 n., 369;
          _Cheshire_ 247, 248, 262 n.;
          _Derby_ 299, 299 n.;
          _Devon_ 112, 121, 155, 222 n., 259 n.;
          _Dorset_ 262 n.;
          _Essex_ 110, 255, 256 n., 265 n.;
          _Glos._ 262 n.;
          _Hants._ 223, 250, 255, 256, 256 n., 262 n.;
          _Hereford_ 222 n., 260, 262 n.;
          _Herts._ 110 seq., 182, 248 seq., 252, 254, 256 n., 258, 261,
        263, 263 n., 344 seq.;
          _Hunts._ 265 n.; Kent 110, 223, 256 n., 261, 264;
          _Lancs._ 259;
          _Leicester_ 111, 112, 265 n., 299;
          _Lincs._ 42, 111, 264;
          _Middlesex_ 264 n.;
          _Monmouthshire_ 252, 262 n.;
          _Nottingham_ 256 n., 257 seq., 264, 361;
          _Norfolk_ 104, 105, 223 n., 224, 253 n., 256 n., 261, 263,
        264 n., 311, 312, 313;
          _Pembroke_ 225;
          _Radnor_ 247, 248;
          _Rutland_ 156, 156 n., 265 n., 338;
          _Shropshire_ 224, 260, 262, 263 n.;
          _Staffordshire_ 222 n., 262;
          _Suffolk_ 149 n., 245, 261, 263, 264, 264 n., 365;
          _Sussex_ 256 n., 261, 265 n.;
          _Surrey_ 222 n., 256, 261, 265, 357 seq.;
          _Somerset_ 222, 245 n., 263 n.;
          _Warwick_ 263 n.;
          _Wilts._ 260 n.;
          _Worcester_ 262, 262 n.;
          _Yorkshire_ 45, 111, 128, 222, 223, 255, 256 n., 259

  workhouses, workinghouse 75, 138 n., 173, 223, 241, 243, 260 n., 272,
        274, 276;
              Abingdon 226, 260;
              Barnstaple 204;
              Cambridge 226;
              Colchester 113;
              Guildford 222, 358;
              King's Lynn 113, 224;
              Little Holland 226;
              Newbury 225, 260;
              Plymouth 259 n.;
              Reading 112, 225;
              Sheffield 225;
              Shrewsbury 260,
              Taunton 226

  workmen, _worckmen_ 4, 52, 70, 85, 140, _see_ labourers, wages, statutes, labour
  worsted, manufacture of 110 n., 224

  Wright, Edmund 197 n.

  Wroth, Sir T. 74

  Wycombe 185

  Wymer, Middle 103

  Wyot 121


  Yarmouth 200

  yarn 182, 272
    "  house 37

  York co. 148 n., 167 seq., 177, 191, 194 n., 215, 240, 241, 242, 259,
        340 seq.
    "  city 45, 64, 80, 81, 111, 114, 209
    "  Archbishop of 86 n., 122

  young people 42, 99, 299, _see_ children

  Ypres 20


      CAMBRIDGE: PRINTED BY J. AND C. F. CLAY, AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS.


       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.

Larger in-line font size is denoted by +plus signs+.

Obvious printer's errors corrected, including some minor corrections to
the numbering of sidenotes in Chapter 13 to match the information given
in the chapter heading.

Every effort has been made to replicate this text as faithfully as
possible, including obsolete and variant spellings, non-standard
punctuation, inconsistently italicized and hyphenated words, and other
inconsistencies.

In three places in the original text, there are intentional gaps where
it appears that a words was redacted. These are left as printed.

Some indexed items were out of sequence in the original text (Entries
starting with “Thr” preceded those starting with “Tho”; these were left
as printed.

There are many instances of dual dating, indicated in the transcribed
text with a single forward slash (e.g. 1580/1). More information about
this practice is available at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dual_dating.

P.160: The anchor for footnote 3 was missing from this page in the
scanned volume. Based on context, transcriber moved the anchor for
footnote 2, and placed a new anchor for footnote 3.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Early History of English Poor
Relief, by E. M. Leonard

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EARLY HISTORY OF ENGLISH POOR RELIEF ***

***** This file should be named 59129-0.txt or 59129-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/9/1/2/59129/

Produced by MWS, Christopher Wright and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

